Energy Bill

[1st Allocated Day]

[Relevant Documents: First Report from the Energy and Climate Change Committee, Session 2012-13, on the Draft Energy Bill: pre-legislative scrutiny, HC 275, and the Government response, Cm 8504, Oral Evidence taken by the Energy and Climate Change Committee, Session 2012-13, on Investment in energy infrastructure and the Energy Bill, HC 749 i-iii.]

Consideration of Bill, as amended in Public Bill Committee.

New Clause 8

Power to make capacity market rules

‘(1) The Secretary of State may make capacity market rules which, subject to subsection (2), may contain any provision that may be made by electricity capacity regulations.

(2) Capacity market rules may not make—

(a) provision falling within—

(i) section 21(3);

(ii) section 22(3);

(iii) paragraphs (f) or (g) of section 22(4);

(iv) section 22(5)(a);

(v) paragraphs (b), (c), (d) or (f) of section 23(2);

(vi) section 24;

(vii) section [Provision about electricity demand reduction];

(b) provision for the Secretary of State to require a person to provide information or advice to the Secretary of State.

(3) Electricity capacity regulations may make provision to confer on the Authority, to such extent and subject to such conditions as may be specified in the regulations, the power to make capacity market rules.

(4) The conditions may in particular include conditions about consultation; and provision made by virtue of subsection (3) must provide that, before any exercise of the power to make capacity market rules, the Authority must consult—

(a) any person who is a holder of a licence to supply electricity under section 6(1)(d) of EA 1989;

(b) any person who is a capacity provider.

(5) Provision made by virtue of subsection (3) may include provision—

(a) for the reference to the Secretary of State in section27(2)(c) to have effect, for the purposes of capacity market rules and to such extent as may be specified in the regulations, as a reference to the Authority;

(b) for section27(3) to apply in relation to a disclosure required by virtue of the capacity market rules.’.—(Michael Fallon.)

Brought up, and read the First time.

16:55:00

The Minister of State, Department of Energy and Climate Change (Michael Fallon)
I beg to move, That the clause be read a Second time.

Mr Speaker
With this it will be convenient to discuss the following:

Government new clause 9—Capacity market rules: procedure.

Government new clause 10—Capacity market rules: further provision.

New clause 5—Expert panel—

‘Schedule [The Expert Panel] has effect.’.

New schedule 1—

‘The Expert Panel

1 Regulations shall establish a panel of experts (in this Act referred to as “the Expert Panel”) in accordance with paragraphs (2) to (6) below.

Duty to consult

2 (1) Regulations made by virtue of paragraph 1 shall provide that before—

(a) any contracts for differences are entered into under Part 1; or

(b) any investment contracts are entered into under Schedule 3

the Secretary of State shall seek advice from, and the opinion of, the Expert Panel in relation to the matters specified in sub-paragraph (2) below.

(2) The matters in relation to which advice and opinion is to be sought from the Expert Panel are—

(a) any advice provided to the Secretary of State by the national system operator;

(b) the financial and other terms on which it is proposed a contract for difference or an investment contract be entered into;

(c) whether the agreed strike price (or equivalent) and the term of the contract represents value for money for consumers; and

(d) whether, in all the circumstances, it is appropriate for the CFD Counterparty to enter into the relevant contract.

(3) Where the Secretary of State proposes to disregard in whole or in part any of the advice or opinion provided by the Expert Panel, he shall be under a duty to ensure the Expert Panel is provided with his reasons for disregarding or disagreeing with the advice or opinion and place a copy of the reasoning in the Library of the House.

3 (1) provide that it shall be the duty of the Secretary of State and the national system operator to provide the Expert Panel with all such information as it may require;

(2) require the Expert Panel to provide the Authority and Parliament with details of any advice and opinion provided under this Part;

(3) require the Expert Panel to publish minutes of its meetings; and

(4) permit the Expert Panel to publish such information as the Expert Panel thinks fit about the advice it gives.

Membership etc. of the Expert Panel

4 The members of the Expert Panel shall be appointed by the Secretary of State and shall comprise a Chairman, a consumer representative, a representative of the Committee on Climate Change, a representative of the Authority and such other members as the Secretary of State may decide.

5 (1) In appointing persons to be members of the Expert Panel, the Secretary of State must secure, so far as practicable, that the Expert Panel—

(a) is independent; and

(b) is comprised of technical, academic, economic, legal and such other experts necessary to give the informed advice required.

(2) The Expert Panel must not include any person who is—

(a) employed by an eligible generator, or who has been employed by an eligible generator in the previous 12 months;

(b) employed by an electricity supplier, or who has been employed by an electricity supplier in the previous 12 months; or

(c) employed by the national system operator.

(3) The Chairman and every member of the Expert Panel—

(a) shall be appointed for a fixed period, specified in the terms of their appointment, but shall be eligible for reappointment at the end of that period;

(b) shall not serve on the Expert Panel for longer than eight years in total;

(c) may at any time be removed by a notice from the Expert Panel to the Secretary of State following a majority vote.

Committees and other procedures of the Expert Panel

6 The Expert Panel may make such arrangements as they think fit—

(a) for committees established by the Expert Panel to give advice to it about carrying out the Expert Panel’s functions, providing such committees only include persons who are members of the Expert Panel;

(b) for regulating its own procedure and for regulating the procedure of committees established by them, including timescales of giving advice, as it sees fit;

(c) as to quorums and the making of decisions by majority.’.

Amendment 162, in clause 5, page 4, line 42, at end add—

‘with predominating weight given to (2)(c) the cost to consumers.’.

Government amendment 52.

Amendment 163, in clause 6, page 5, line 21, at end insert—

‘(c) which is a public document and will be made available, together with all related documents, by the Secretary of State and the parties to the contract.’.

Amendment 23, page 5, line 28, at end insert—

‘, with the exception of electricity generated from nuclear power stations’.

Amendment 32, page 5, line 29, at end insert—

‘ “Biomass” means fuel used in a generating station where—

‘(a) at least 90 per cent of its energy content is derived from relevant material (that is to say, material which is, or is derived directly or indirectly from, plant matter, animal matter, funghi or algae), and

(b) if fossil fuel forms part of it—

(i) the fossil fuel is present following a process—

(aa) to which the relevant material has been subject, and

(bb) the undertaking of which has caused the fossil fuel to be present in, on or with that material even though that was not the object of the process; or

(ii) it is waste and the fossil fuel forming part of it was not added to it with a view to its being used as a fuel.

“Qualifying combined heat and power generating station” means a combined heat and power generating station which has been accredited under the CHPQA.’.

Government amendments 53 to 60.

Amendment 33, in clause 10, page 8, line 28, at end insert—

‘(10) A direction may not be given under this section to a fossil fuel or renewable energy plant with a rated capacity of 15MW or greater that use any biomass unless they are—

(a) a qualifying combined heat and power generating station; or

(b) an operational carbon capture and storage plant.’.

Government amendment 61.

Amendment 24, in clause 11, page 8, line 37, at end insert—

‘(3) Payments offered under a contract for difference relating to the supply of electricity generated by nuclear power must not exceed payments offered under any contract for the supply of electricity from renewable sources.

(4) For the purposes of subsection (3)—

(a) the calculation of payments must include both the strike price and the duration of the contract;

(b) renewable sources are defined in accordance with Article 2 of Directive 2009/28/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 23 April 2009 on the promotion of the use of energy from renewable sources.’.

Government amendments 62 to 65.

Amendment 152, in clause 17, page 11, line 6, at end insert—

‘(2A) In determining for the purposes of an order under subsection (1) whether the maximum cost provided for by the order has been reached, or a cost greater than that maximum would be incurred, a cost is to be taken into account if, and only if, it has been incurred, or is to be incurred, in connection with low carbon electricity generation.

(2B) The Secretary of State may give a direction suspending the effect of an order under subsection (1) for such period, and in relation to costs of such description, as are specified in the direction.

(2C) Before giving a direction under subsection (2B) the Secretary of State must consult such persons as the Secretary of State thinks appropriate.’.

Amendment 164, in clause 18, page 11, line 33, at end insert—

‘(i) All consumers of electricity upon whom the costs of the regulations will fall.’.

Amendment 27, page 11, line 35, at end insert—

‘(3) Before making regulations under this Chapter which relate to nuclear electricity generation, the Secretary of State must ask the National Audit Office to carry out an examination of and produce a report on whether the terms of the contract for difference offer value for money.

(4) The Secretary of State may ask the National Audit Office to carry out an examination and produce a report on the terms of a contract relating to non-nuclear generation.

(5) The National Audit Office report and recommendations must be published one month before a contract is laid before Parliament.’.

Amendment 48, in clause 21, page 12, line 40, at end insert—

‘capacity may be secured by capacity auctions or by the establishment of a strategic reserve or by other means’.

Amendment 165, in clause 22, page 13, line 15, after ‘agreement’ insert—

‘is a public document to be made available, together with all related documents, by the Secretary of State and the parties to the agreement; and’.

Government amendments 101 and 102.

Amendment 29, in clause 22, page 13, line 21, at end insert—

‘(2A) Electricity capacity regulations may not make provision in respect of fossil fuel plants.

(2B) For the purposes of subsection (2A) “fossil fuel plant” means an electricity generating station which satisfies the conditions in Chapter 8, Section 42(4)(b).’.

Amendment 28, page 13, line 23, at end insert—

‘(3A) Capacity agreements may not be made in respect of nuclear electricity generation.’.

Amendment 49, page 14, line 6, at end insert—

‘(e) conferring on the Secretary of State the power by regulation to introduce a system of strategic reserve of supply; and

(f) conferring on The Secretary of State by regulation the power to designate a nominated person to hold and manage the Strategic Reserve on his behalf (“the Strategic Reserve Operator”).’.

Government amendment 103.

Amendment 50,  page 14, line 9, at end add—

(a) A person is eligible to be designated as the Strategic Reserve Operator if the person is—

(i) a company formal and registered under the Companies Act 2006; or

(ii) a public authority, including any person whose functions are of a public nature.

(b) The Strategic Reserve Operator must contract with the System Operator for the circumstances under which the Strategic Reserve Operator supplies power to the System Operator.

(c) The Secretary of State must approve the drawing up of any contract between the System Operator and the Strategic Reserve Operator and may from time to time vary the terms of the contract should circumstances require.

(d) The Secretary of State must lay before Parliament a reasoned case for any change of content under subsection (5).

(e) Strategic Reserve regulations may make provision for payments to be made by electricity suppliers or capacity providers to a settlement body for the purposes of enabling the body—

(i) to meet such descriptions of its costs that the Secretary of State considers appropriate;

(ii) to hold sums in reserve;

(iii) to make payments to the Strategic Reserve Operator for the purpose of securing and operating Strategic Reserve capacity.’.

Government amendment 104.

Amendment 166, in clause 27, page 15, line 40, leave out ‘may’ and insert ‘must’.

Government amendments 105 to 107.

Amendment 94, in page 23, line 5, leave out clause 38.

Amendment 151, in clause 38, page 23, line 34, at end add—

‘(5) The Secretary of State may not exercise the power under subsection (1) if the consequence would be to raise the price of electricity for consumers.’.

Amendment 153, in clause 41, page 25, leave out lines 35 to 42.

Amendment 154, page 27, leave out lines 9 and 10.

Amendment 155, page 28, line 17, leave out ‘may’ and insert—

‘must, so as to make good the shortfall,’.

Amendment 156, page 27, line 14, before ‘make’, insert—

‘and insofar as subsection (12) applies must,’.

Amendment 157, page 29, line 8, leave out subsection (6).

Amendment 158, page 29, line 7, leave out ‘(10)’ and insert ‘(9)’.

Amendment 159, page 34, leave out from line 8 to end of line 37 on page 35.

Amendment 160, page 36, leave out from line 1 to end of line 46.

Amendment 161, page 37, leave out lines 18 and 19.

Amendment 167, page 36, line 5, leave out ‘the costs’ and insert ‘the publicly substantiated costs’.

Amendment 168, page 36, line 8, leave out ‘the income’ and insert ‘the publicly substantiated income’.

Amendment 169, page 36, line 24, at end insert—

‘(g) the costs to consumers’.

Amendment 170, page 38, line 10, leave out

‘A certificate purchase order may provide for’

and insert—

‘A certificate purchase order will require at least the same level of information as required under the Renewables Obligation and may provide for’.

Amendment 171, page 38, line 37, leave out ‘may’ and insert ‘must’.

Amendment 172, page 38, line 38, leave out ‘subsection (3)’ and insert ‘Section 32X’.

Amendment 95, in page 42, line 27, leave out clause 42.

Amendment 173, in clause 42, page 42, line 28, at beginning insert—

‘Unless the Secretary of State or the Regulator permits otherwise in the consumer interest,’.

Amendment 174, page 42, line 31, leave out ‘7.446’ and insert ‘8.760’.

Amendment 179, page 42, line 35, at end insert—

‘( ) Section 42(1) is not to apply in relation to CCS plant until completion of the commissioning and proving period that shall last no longer than 3 years.’.

Amendment 150, page 42, line 36, leave out ‘2044’ and insert ‘2029’.

Amendment 96, in page 43, line 41, leave out clause 43.

Amendment 175, in clause 43, page 43, line 43, at end insert—

‘or significant risk of other disadvantage to the consumer.’.

Amendment 97, in page 45, line 14, leave out clause 44.

Amendment 98, in page 45, line 32, leave out clause 45.

Amendment 99, in page 46, line 36, leave out clause 46.

Amendment 176, in clause 50, page 50, line 16, leave out

‘As soon as is reasonably practical’

and insert ‘Within one month’.

Amendment 177, page 50, line 16, leave out ‘five years’ and insert ‘one year’.

Government amendment 66.

Amendment 178, page 50, line 31, at end insert—

‘(d) assess and detail the impact on electricity prices to the various classes of consumers of the measures described in the Act.’.

Government amendments 119 to 125.

Amendment 21, in clause 121, page 92, line 15, leave out from ‘objects’ to end of line 17.

Amendment 22, page 92, line 17, at end insert—

‘(f) requiring a licence holder to ensure that—

(i) customers on prepayment meters shall be charged the lowest tariff available from that licence holder;

(ii) no more than 20 per cent. of each payment made goes towards meeting outstanding debt.’.

Government amendments 126 to 133, 68 and 134.

Amendment 26, page 106, line 40, in schedule 2, at end insert—

‘(2A) Before entering into an investment contract, the Secretary of State must ask the National Audit Office to carry out an examination of and produce a report on whether the terms of the contract offer value for money.

(2B) The National Audit Office report and recommendations must be published one month before a contract is laid before Parliament.’.

Government amendment 71.

Amendment 25, page 107, line 43, in schedule 2, at end insert—

‘(6A) An investment contract may not include provision to underwrite or provide state guarantees for all or part of the construction costs of nuclear generation plants.’.

Government amendment 72.

Amendment 9, page 108, line 24, at end insert—

‘( ) For the purposes of paragraphs 1 and 2, information is “confidential information” only if it constitutes a trade secret.’.

Amendment 8, page 108, line 26, leave out paragraph 3.

Government amendments 73 to 90.

Amendment 148, page 119, line 13, in schedule 4, at end insert—

‘(iii) substantial pollution abatement equipment dealing with oxides of sulphur, oxides of nitrogen, heavy metal emissions or particles is fitted to the generating station.’.

Amendment 149, page 119, line 39, leave out ‘42(5)(b)’ and insert ‘42(6)(b)’.

Michael Fallon
I rise to speak to Government new clauses 8, 9 and 10, and Government amendments 52 to 66, 68, 71 to 90, 101 to 107, and 119 to 135. I should also like to respond to the amendments tabled by hon. Members. I ask the indulgence of the House if my speech is necessarily fuller than it might be so that I can do justice to each of the six main areas in the group, namely the transparency of investment contracts; the counterparty arrangements; the capacity market; nuclear power; other issues including biomass, emissions performance standards and the costs of electricity market reform; and consumer tariffs.

I thank Opposition Members and other hon. Members for their contributions in Committee. The Minister of State, Department of Energy and Climate Change, my right hon. Friend the Member for Bexhill and Battle (Gregory Barker), said at the time that the Bill needed clear accountability and that Parliament must have the information it needs to scrutinise the delivery of electricity market reform properly.

New clause 5 and new schedule 1 seek to establish an expert panel to scrutinise electricity market reform. Let me assure hon. Members that development of the contracts for difference and investment contracts will be informed by close consultation with relevant experts. We have already taken a number of steps in that regard, which is why I suggest that new clause 5 and new schedule 1 are unnecessary.

Our decisions on strike prices for CFDs will be informed by analysis from the National Grid. The robustness of that analysis will be scrutinised by an independent panel of technical experts who will report to the Government. Their report will be published. Any divergence of opinion between the panel, the Government and National Grid will be reported and explained. Given the existing role of the panel of technical experts, I do not see a wider remit for another expert panel to look at CFDs.

I agree that investment contracts should be subject to rigorous scrutiny and the best available advice, which they will be. For investment contracts relating to renewables projects, I am minded to use the draft CFD strike prices informed by the robust process just  outlined. For other low-carbon technologies, which are bilaterally negotiated, specialist advice will be sought as appropriate and there will be rigorous scrutiny. For example, for Hinkley Point C we have appointed technical and financial specialists to advise on whether any proposal represents value for money. We will publish details of that contract when and if it is negotiated.

Mr Mike Weir (Angus) (SNP)
I am listening closely to the Minister. Does he share the worries of many hon. Members? The Bill will presumably finish its progress in the House tonight, but we still do not know what the strike prices are. We have been promised the publication of a document setting out details including strike prices for months, but it keeps being put back. I am told that it will not appear before July. Does the Minister understand the concern about the transparency of the process because we will not know what the strike prices are before the Bill completes its passage?

Michael Fallon
The Bill is before the House today and tomorrow, and has some way to go before it completes its passage through Parliament. Let me assure the hon. Gentleman that he will have an indication of the draft strike prices before the Bill completes its passage. If he will allow me, I want to say more in a moment about how we can improve transparency.

Amendments 8 and 9, tabled by the right hon. Member for Don Valley (Caroline Flint) and the hon. Members for Rutherglen and Hamilton West (Tom Greatrex) and for Liverpool, Wavertree (Luciana Berger), focus on the important issue of transparency of investment contracts. The Bill requires all investment contracts to be laid before Parliament alongside a statement of their importance to Government objectives. For Hinkley Point C, we have also committed to publishing summaries of reports from our external advisers. There is a difficult balance to be struck between publishing as much as possible about a contract, while also allowing some commercially sensitive information to be withheld from publication. It is crucial that developers provide the information we need to show that a contract represents value for money, but it would be inappropriate to publish information that damages a developer’s commercial interests.

This point is relevant to amendments 163, 165, 166, 171 and 172, which were tabled by my hon. Friend the Member for Daventry (Chris Heaton-Harris) and relate to information acquired or produced under the Bill. It would not be appropriate to release commercially confidential information provided under the provisions, but let me reassure the House and the hon. Member for Angus (Mr Weir) that we will publish details on the CFDs and capacity agreements signed each year through annual updates to the EMR delivery plan, and details of how much of the budget has been expended. Secondary legislation, such as that under the capacity market provisions, will set out details of the information flows, transparency and handling of sensitive information. That includes information acquired under clause 27. Ofgem will continue to publish information gathered from generators about the biomass they have used.

John Robertson (Glasgow North West) (Lab)
On the rules governing what is considered sensitive, who will set the criteria: the companies themselves or the Government?

Michael Fallon
The judgment will be one for the Government, and I want to come on to a proposal on that. I also want to assure my hon. Friend the Member for Daventry, in relation to amendment 164, that there will be public consultation on the draft regulations in the autumn. On amendment 170, relative to what is currently required under the renewables obligation, we would remove only redundant information requirements under the fixed price certificate scheme. However, in answer to the hon. Member for Glasgow North West (John Robertson), I am mindful of the points made in Committee on the need to maximise transparency.

There are a number of other improvements we can make to investment contracts. First, following the good points made in Committee by the hon. Member for Brent North (Barry Gardiner) on the distinction between withholding and redacting information, I will make a commitment to publish a description of any information that is withheld and the reason for that. Secondly, I have tabled amendments 71 and 72, which remove the Secretary of State’s discretion to withhold information from a contract after it has been agreed, but before it is laid before Parliament. That means that any confidential information will have to be clearly identified as such during contract negotiations, and there is no further discretion then to withhold information once those are concluded.

Martin Horwood (Cheltenham) (LD)
The Minister is, however, describing a process in which information is published and laid before Parliament after the contracts have been signed. If, as is likely in the case of Electricité de France, we are talking about a 30-year contract, does he agree that it is practically pointless to have scrutiny after the event, when we would in effect be locked in for nearly a generation? What exactly does he expect Parliament to do if it then looks at the published details of the negotiations and does not like them?

Michael Fallon
I will describe in some detail the arrangements for the scrutiny of any deal done or any negotiations concluded at Hinkley, but I would suggest to my hon. Friend that Parliament is pretty good at scrutinising such arrangements, including through its various Committees. Likewise, it is of course also open to the National Audit Office to provide scrutiny.

Joan Walley (Stoke-on-Trent North) (Lab)
rose—

Michael Fallon
I must make some progress, if the hon. Lady will forgive me.

The third improvement I am suggesting through amendment 52 is to place a duty on the Government to publish a report each year setting out how they have exercised their powers and carried out their functions under part 2 of the Bill. I hope that that provides particular comfort to my hon. Friend the Member for Daventry, who, through amendments 176 and 177, is looking to bring forward the five-year review in clause 50 and require speedy progress, but the review that he suggests would take more than one month, while enough time must elapse if we are to collect sufficient data to make an informed judgment. On his amendment 178, however, I can assure him that we will look closely at the impact on different consumers when carrying out the five-year review, as we already do with  our impact assessments on electricity market reform. Finally, Government amendment 66, which follows a helpful suggestion in Committee—again from the hon. Member for Brent North—will bring the emissions performance standard within the scope of the review.

I turn now to the counterparty arrangements for CFDs and investment contracts. I have tabled several amendments on this topic—again, many of them responding to very reasonable points made in Committee. Amendments 53 to 55 and 74 to 76 set out the circumstances in which we might need more than one counterparty, while amendments 56 and 77 extend the notice period before a body can withdraw its consent to act as counterparty. Amendments 57, 62, 63, 78, 82 and 83 make minor changes to avoid any confusion over the use of the terms “obligations” and “liabilities”, while amendments 58, 65, 85 and 86 create a statutory guarantee that the counterparty will exercise its functions to ensure CFD and investment contract liabilities are met and place a duty on the Government to provide the powers to do this.

John Robertson
Will the Minister give way?

Michael Fallon
I will just finish this section.

Amendments 60, 64, 80 and 84 make it clear that supplier debts can be pursued through the courts and that payments to generators will be pro rata in the unlikely scenario that the counterparty does not have sufficient funds immediately available, while amendments 59 and 79 ensure that suppliers only face costs that are related to the regime, including operational costs of the counterparty. Amendments 61, 68 and 81 are minor corrections and clarifications to ensure that the settlement of payments can work effectively, and amendments 88, 89 and 90 introduce a duty to transfer investment contracts to the CFD counterparty, thus ensuring they transfer quickly once the CFD regime is in place next year—that reflects points made by the hon. Member for Southampton, Test (Dr Whitehead) in Committee—while amendments 73 and 87 are minor changes to align the drafting of schedule 2 with part 2.

I am sorry to have kept the hon. Member for Glasgow North West (John Robertson) waiting.

John Robertson
I thank the Minister for being generous in taking interventions.

Who will scrutinise the counterparties’ liabilities? We saw how everyone thought that the banks were safe and had plenty of money and that things were good, but it did not turn out that way, and even the Treasury’s own predictions over the last three years have not been met properly. What guarantee can the Minister give, therefore, that the counterparties will have sufficient finances to meet their liabilities?

Michael Fallon
I am happy to give the hon. Gentleman further written assurances on that. He might be on rather weak ground in discussing the regulatory framework put in place for the banks, given that we have had to take immediate and fairly radical steps to improve it, but if I can give him any further reassurances on his main point, I certainly will.

The third main issue covered by this group of amendments is the funding and governance of the capacity market. I shall deal with the remaining Government  amendments and new clauses, which relate to that market and are, I hope, relatively uncontroversial, before coming to the more important amendments tabled by the hon. Member for Southampton, Test. New clauses 8 to 10 and amendments 105 to 107 will enable us to set out detail of the capacity market in a combination of two places: in regulations, changes to which would be made and overseen by the Secretary of State; and in rules, which once made by the Secretary of State could be overseen by Ofgem.

The intention is to give Ofgem the responsibility for consulting on and implementing future changes to those elements in capacity market rules, in line with evolutions in the existing market structure. These changes enable that. However, Ministers would retain accountability for key aspects of the scheme, such as capacity volumes and cost control. Amendments 101 to 104 make clear our intentions for the capacity market settlement body, which has overall responsibility for managing payment flows—in short, that capacity payments will have to flow through the settlement body; that it can discharge certain technical obligations and functions through an agent; and that it can recover costs only in connection with the obligations placed on it as the settlement body.

Amendments 45 to 50, tabled by the hon. Member for Southampton, Test, would allow a second, alternative capacity mechanism, known as a strategic reserve, to be included in the Bill. As I understand it, a strategic reserve would hold a small amount of capacity outside the market, to be deployed only in limited circumstances. The Government have always acknowledged the potential benefits of a reserve as a short-term measure. If it is necessary to respond to a short-term security of supply challenge, Ofgem already has powers it could use. For instance, it could strengthen the options that the national grid has, to ensure sufficient capacity is in place before the capacity market is implemented. However, I would suggest to the hon. Gentleman that a capacity market is a better medium-term solution to address the current investment challenge and ensure continued security of supply, for two reasons.

First, if used as a longer-term intervention, a strategic reserve could undermine the market signals for capacity providers by reducing revenue certainty. That is because of the uncertainty about when the reserve might be deployed and the negative impact on the revenue of other capacity providers. There is a danger that investors may decide that future Governments will be tempted to use the reserve too frequently—a reasonable concern in a world of rising prices—which would increase the risk of not getting a sufficient return on their investment. The resultant increase in financing costs would flow through to the consumer, with the long-term risk that less capacity is built and the Government are forced to create a larger and larger reserve, at which point the competitive market disappears. By contrast, a capacity market is open to all providers of reliable capacity, with the only exceptions intended to be plant receiving support under CFDs. This provides the right, market-based signals for both existing and new capacity. Secondly, offering both capacity mechanisms in the Bill—the capacity market and the strategic reserve—would create regulatory uncertainty about the Government’s preferred approach and, again, act as a disincentive to investment.

Let me turn, fourthly, to nuclear power. The Government have made it clear that nuclear generation has an important  part to play in decarbonising electricity generation. It is a source of reliable generation capacity and it is a vital part of our energy mix. CFDs are intended to provide support to all forms of low carbon generation; hence I could not support amendment 23, as it would exclude nuclear generation. I also have concerns about amendment 24, which seeks to limit the amount paid under a CFD to nuclear generation to no more than what can be paid to renewables generation. It would not make sense artificially to link the amount of support for one technology with support for another. Support should be set based on robust evidence and advice that demonstrates, for instance, that the level of support makes a project economically viable—and thus will attract investment—and that it delivers our policy objectives while minimising costs for consumers. More widely, renewables support rates will vary over time, as has happened with the renewables obligation, and a mechanism to link support levels in this way, as proposed in amendment 24, could be cumbersome and could restrict our discretion to set support levels that might otherwise provide value for money.

17:15:00

Caroline Lucas (Brighton, Pavilion) (Green)
Does the Minister agree, however, that the Government’s position on nuclear ought to be guided by the coalition agreement, which clearly stated that new nuclear should “receive no public subsidy”? Is he not acting rather like Humpty Dumpty in “Through the Looking Glass”, in that he is making words mean what he wants them to mean? Subsidy means giving extra money to that technology; it does not matter that he is also giving subsidies to renewables. He seems to be arguing that it is not a subsidy if it is being given to renewables and to nuclear, but it is still a subsidy. Will he not recognise that and stick to the line in his own coalition agreement?

Michael Fallon
Of course I stick to the line. On this side of the House we all stick to the terms of the coalition agreement, and it is important that we keep doing that. I do not see any reference in the Bill to the word “subsidy”. When the hon. Lady sees the terms of any contract that might be concluded with EDF for Hinkley, or indeed with Horizon Hitachi for the next two stations, she will see that the word “subsidy” is not involved.

Amendment 25 would prohibit the Government from underwriting, or providing in investment contracts, guarantees to cover nuclear construction costs. Let me reassure the House, if there is a concern about construction cost overruns, that such overruns for new nuclear will be borne by the developer. There are two scenarios, however, in which it might be reasonable for certain construction risks to be shared. They include cases involving less mature technologies such as carbon capture and storage, reflecting the high level of uncertainty around those construction costs, and those relating to certain events outside a developer’s control, such as specified change in law events. An example could involve a law that specifically discriminated against nuclear.

More widely, I can assure the House that we will only sign a contract in respect of Hinkley that is fair, affordable and represents clear value for money for consumers. Amendments 26 and 27 would delay the Government’s making CFD regulations relating to nuclear power or  signing an investment contract until the National Audit Office had first carried out a value-for-money assessment of nuclear power or the relevant investment contract. It would not be right to hold up the delivery of a major Government programme that is vital for economic growth and jobs across the country until the NAO had undertaken a review. We have already put a significant amount of expert scrutiny into the decision-making process to ensure a robust evidence base, and will be consulting on the draft electricity market reform delivery plan to augment that.

More generally, the major CFD regulations will be consulted on and will be subject to affirmative parliamentary approval. Investment contracts are already subject to close scrutiny by external advisers to ascertain whether they represent value for money. Combined with my earlier commitments and amendments to the Bill, this will ensure transparency of investment contracts.

Joan Walley
Is there not a concern about the role of the National Audit Office in all this? There is no way of achieving transparency during the negotiation process, and unless we accept the amendments proposing a panel to oversee the process, there will be no way of finding out what is being agreed before we are presented with a fait accompli.

Michael Fallon
My first answer to the hon. Lady is that there is nothing to prevent the National Audit Office from looking into anything it wants to. The Government cannot control that, and nor can she. Secondly, I have already said that summaries of the advice will be published, and it will be perfectly possible for Committees of this House to look into these matters and satisfy themselves that the appropriate advice has been taken.

Joan Walley
Is not part of the problem the fact that the National Audit Office and the Comptroller and Auditor General do not have statutory powers to scrutinise public spending on behalf of Parliament before the negotiations have been completed?

Michael Fallon
I am not sure that is wholly right. I think that the NAO has, as I recall, already been looking at High Speed 2—before the contract for it has been placed.

Joan Walley
rose—

Caroline Lucas
rose—

Michael Fallon
I want to be fair to the hon. Member for Brighton, Pavilion (Caroline Lucas), too, but I give way again to the hon. Member for Stoke-on-Trent North (Joan Walley).

Joan Walley
I am most grateful, but the point is that while the Comptroller and Auditor General might consider doing a review once a negotiation has been struck, at that stage it is too late to understand what has been included. We thus have a situation in which the Minister should perhaps comment on the role of Parliament in scrutinising this issue.

Michael Fallon
It is for Ministers to take these decisions and for Ministers to be accountable to Parliament for them. It is for Parliament to scrutinise the decision taken. I am sure the hon. Lady is not suggesting that Parliament itself should take this decision; in the end, it is for the Executive to take their decisions about investment and infrastructure and for those decisions to be fully accountable to, and scrutinised by, Parliament.

Caroline Lucas
I reiterate the point that the hon. Lady has just made because the National Audit Office cannot look at the issue at the key point where we need the information. My wider point is this. The Minister keeps saying that nuclear offers value for money, is fair and affordable and so forth, but how can that possibly be the case when this Government envisage locking taxpayers into a 35-year contract to pay around twice the current market price for power, with the money then going to line the coffers of the French nuclear power station operators?

Michael Fallon
I wonder how the hon. Lady seems to have more information about the final details of the contract than I do, as I would suggest to her that I am a little closer to it than she is. When the details are published, she will find that not everything that has appeared in the newspapers is wholly accurate.

Several hon. Members
rose—

Michael Fallon
I must be fair to the House and make some progress because I am only halfway through this group of amendments. If I am pressed to give way one more time, I will of course do so.

Martin Horwood
The Minister is very generous in giving way. I would like to ask him about one aspect, which was raised by Dr Paul Dorfman of the Warwick business school, and University College, London. They have speculated that the contract now being discussed with Electricité de France could be as long as for 40 years. In the spirit of parliamentary openness and scrutiny that the Minister has described, will he clarify whether that is an accurate guess?

Michael Fallon
My hon. Friend tempts me, but I am afraid that, much as I would like to do so, I am not able to speculate about the terms currently being negotiated with Electricité de France.

Finally on this group, amendments 28 and 29 seek to stop nuclear and fossil fuel generation from participating in the capacity market, which is designed to ensure the security of future electricity supplies. To ensure the most efficient mix of capacity and to avoid favouring specific technologies, the market needs to be technology neutral and support a range of generation sources, such as from fossil fuels, existing hydroelectric and nuclear plant and the demand-side response. I can confirm, however, that we do not intend to allow plant receiving a contract for difference, including new nuclear plant receiving a CFD, to participate in the capacity market. We do, of course, expect existing nuclear plant to play an important role.

Let me deal with some of the wider issues in this group of amendments, including bill impacts, biomass, liquidity and so forth. Amendments 32 and 33 specifically relate  to biomass. I would like to thank my hon. Friend the Member for North Devon (Sir Nick Harvey) for raising this issue. His amendment 32 seeks to define biomass in the Bill. Let me make it clear to him that I see no problem with the definition he has drafted, but I suggest that this would be better left to secondary legislation, which would give us the flexibility to amend the definition over time to reflect changes in technologies or, indeed, in the evidence.

In respect of amendment 33, I would not want to limit the amount of support that an individual biomass generator could receive under a CFD, or to impose a condition that biomass generation greater than 15 megawatts could receive support only if it utilised combined heat and power or carbon capture and storage. That would risk excluding efficient forms of biomass generation or forcing all new generation to include combined heat or power, or carbon capture and storage equipment, which it might not be possible to utilise effectively, and I think that it would have the unintended consequence of increasing costs for consumers.

Barry Gardiner (Brent North) (Lab)
rose—

Michael Fallon
I will give way, but I must soon make more progress.

Barry Gardiner
I am grateful to the Minister, who has been extremely generous in engaging in debate. Will he clarify one point? My understanding was that the definition that had been proposed was already incorporated in primary legislation, in an earlier Act of Parliament, and that the objection that he seems to have to it would therefore not apply.

Michael Fallon
I should be happy to check that. I suspect that the hon. Gentleman may be right, but I think that some of my objections would still apply. These things change over time, and I should prefer to have them in secondary legislation. However, if I have wrongly suggested that this is a novel approach, I will certainly get back to the hon. Gentleman.

On amendment 94, we need to be sure that independent generators have a fair chance of entering the market. I am sure that my hon. Friend the Member for Rochester and Strood (Mark Reckless), and other Members who have signed his amendment, would support that. Ofgem will shortly be releasing details of its proposed reforms to improve market liquidity, and I welcome that progress. However, it is crucial for the Government to be able to act if Ofgem is unable to deliver ambitious reforms allowing more independent generation in a timely fashion. That is why we need the backstop powers in clause 38.

Amendments 95 to 99, also tabled by the my hon. Friend the Member for Rochester and Strood, would remove the emissions performance standard from the Bill. I know that my hon. Friend is concerned about its impact on coal-fired generation, and suspect that he feels that the carbon price floor provides sufficient market signals to disincentivise such generation, but the Government's objective is to deliver a clear and unambiguous message to investors that coal-fired generation must significantly reduce its emissions to have a long-term role in our energy mix.

The commitment to decarbonisation is delivered through economic signals such as support for the carbon price, through planning policy—which states that new coal-fired  power stations should be equipped with carbon capture and storage—and through the EPS, a coalition commitment that places a firm limit on the amount of carbon that can be emitted, regardless of the price of coal or carbon. That commitment to reducing emissions would be undermined by amendments 173 to 175, and I hope that my hon. Friend the Member for Daventry understands why I cannot accept them. In relation to amendment 174, I should point out that the formula in clause 42 was carefully designed to ensure that potential emissions from new coal plant would be at least halved.

Amendment 148, tabled by the hon. Member for Brent North, would apply the EPS to existing coal-fired plant that installed pollution abatement equipment to comply with the industrial emissions directive. I understand his fear that, if the relatively low price of coal continues, it may lead to levels of coal generation that will put our decarbonisation objectives at risk. However, our electricity market reform measures should mitigate the risk of carbon “lock-in” by driving investment in new low-carbon generation which will increasingly displace generation from fossil fuel.

Amendment 150 would reduce by 15 years the period in which the emissions limit for a new plant is “grandfathered”. Grandfathering until 2045 gives investors in new gas plant the regulatory certainty they need that the EPS will not stop them from making a return on their investment, thus assisting the provision of the new plants that we require in order to replace ageing capacity. Let me be clear: we need gas-fired generation in our future energy mix to balance increasing levels of intermittent and inflexible plant coming on to the system. Amendment 150 would deter such investment and thus reduce, not increase, the reliability of our electricity supplies.

17:30:00

Lastly on the EPS, Opposition Members have tabled amendment 179, which seeks to exempt CCS projects from the EPS during their commissioning period. The House will recall that the draft Bill contained a similar exemption, but was removed following recommendations from the Select Committee on Energy and Climate Change.

Our view is that the best way to manage risks to CCS projects from the EPS is through each project’s funding contract. That provides greater flexibility to manage project risks in one place and on a case-by-case basis. Also, the EPS already provides a degree of flexibility for plant during the commissioning period.

David Mowat (Warrington South) (Con)
The Minister has referred several times in the last few minutes to CCS technology. What is his core estimate of that being deployable on a commercial basis in the UK?

Michael Fallon
I am not able at the moment to give my hon. Friend a precise timetable. Last year, we had a competition, as he will recall, for CCS. We selected the two principal bids and we are continuing to negotiate, but as soon as I have more news on that, I will ensure that he is one of the first to hear.

I must thank the hon. Member for Brent North for amendment 149. He will see that the small error has already been corrected in the version of the Bill that was introduced to the House on 9 May.

My hon. Friends the Members for Daventry and for Waveney (Peter Aldous) have tabled a number of amendments to clause 41 covering the certificate purchase scheme, which is designed to replace the renewables obligation for the last 10 years of its existence. First, let me reassure my hon. Friend the Member for Waveney that the provisions he seeks to remove through amendments 153, 154 and 157 to 159 simply replicate legislation that exists under the renewables obligation. Caps have been set before, such as for bioliquids; exemptions already exist for very small suppliers; and costs of administering the scheme are already recovered from the RO buy-out funds. The powers he wants to remove through amendment 159 would, for example, be needed to revoke any incorrectly issued certificates. These provisions therefore ensure the continued effective operation of the scheme.

On amendments 155 and 156, requiring the immediate recovery of shortfalls in the levy from suppliers would be unnecessarily prescriptive. That may not be necessary if, for instance, the shortfall is very small and can be made up in the next round of regular levy payments.

Amendments 160, 161, 167 and 168 would either remove our ability to change future support levels for the scheme, or add further validation requirements on the underpinning evidence for a change. Although the Government do not intend to make banding changes under the certificate purchase scheme, I would not want to remove our ability to do so. As we have seen, where there is compelling new evidence to change support levels, such as to protect consumers, it is important that the Government can act, and these provisions are important as they set out the controls on any such change.

On the underpinning evidence, we already take a rigorous approach to the assessment of costs and income in banding reviews under the renewables obligation. I can assure the House that we would do so again in any review of support levels under the certificate purchase scheme.

Let me reassure my hon. Friend the Member for Daventry that, in relation to amendment 169, consumer costs will always be an important consideration in banding reviews. New section 32V(4)(e) in clause 41 makes specific provision for that.

That brings me to the last but most important issue in this group: the costs and benefits of electricity market reform to consumers. A number of amendments have been tabled by my hon. Friends the Members for Daventry, for Waveney, for Gainsborough (Mr Leigh) and for Christchurch (Mr Chope), and we must thank the last two of them for providing such excellent chairmanship of the Bill Committee.

First and foremost, let me be clear that electricity market reform—EMR—is good for the consumer. Gas prices are rising and are projected to carry on rising. We need to move to a more diverse energy mix, which breaks our dependency on both gas and fossil fuel generation. The contract for difference provides protection for consumers by ensuring that generators pay back when the market price goes over the strike price, and the price certainty it brings will reduce the cost of financing new power stations, and thus reduce costs to the consumer. EMR also serves the public interest by reducing carbon emissions and ensuring everyone can benefit from reliable electricity supplies. These are important matters, which  is why I would not want to accept amendment 162 and make them subordinate matters when the Secretary of State is exercising functions under part 2 of the Bill.

On amendment 151, I would not expect use of the liquidity powers in clause 38 to increase costs for consumers over the lifetime of any intervention. The purpose of these powers is to protect consumers by driving competition and reducing prices. A positive outcome for consumers must be proven before action is taken, and that would be shown through an impact assessment, which would be published when consulting on any proposed use of these powers. On amendment 152, contracts for difference can only be for the purpose of encouraging low-carbon generation, so that change is not necessary.

Both today and tomorrow, we need to work in the best interests of consumers and ensure that energy is cheaper as well as greener. I hope that all Members on both sides of the House can see that EMR represents the cheapest way of securing a diverse, low-carbon and reliable energy mix.

I want finally to turn to the amendments involving tariffs and to speak to the relatively minor Government amendments in that group before addressing the amendments tabled by the hon. Member for Angus. In line with the Prime Minister’s crucial commitment to ensure that people are on the cheapest tariff for their preferences, Government amendments 119 to 133 will align the powers in clause 121 more closely with Ofgem’s retail market review proposals. Government amendments 119, 120, 122 and 123 further clarify that those powers cannot be used for the purpose of imposing price controls by limiting the powers of the Secretary of State to make provisions under clause 121 only to the list set out in subsection (3).

In line with Ofgem’s retail market review proposals, Government amendments 125, 127, 128 and 131 will restrict the power to move customers from one tariff to another only to those customers on tariffs closed to new joiners. Government amendment 126 ensures that suppliers will have at least one core tariff slot that is not prescribed. Government amendment 130 clarifies that the power to prescribe that a supplier offers fixed or variable rate tariffs does not equate to setting the price or term for the tariff. Finally, Government amendments 121, 124, 129, 132 and 133 reword a number of the definitions to ensure that the powers can be exercised in the context of existing requirements placed on suppliers as a condition of their supply licence.

Amendments 21 and 22 were tabled by the hon. Member for Angus and address concerns he raised in Committee. Amendment 21 relates to the proposed Secretary of State power set out in clause 121 to move consumers off poor-value dead tariffs. His amendment would leave the only basis on which people can be moved off poor-value dead tariffs as an opt-out for consumers. Moving customers off such tariffs is a key part of meeting the Prime Minister’s commitment on energy bills. I would like to reassure hon. Members that in the event that Ofgem’s reforms are unduly delayed, we fully intend to make use of the opt-out approach rather than an opt-in. As a result of Ofgem’s review, however, it could become clear that there are certain circumstances in which some consumers could be actively disadvantaged by an opt-out approach, so we consider it prudent to retain the option to pursue an opt-in approach if necessary. Consumers could be disadvantaged  should it, for example, transpire that as a result of market changes they would actually be better off staying on specific closed tariffs or that taking an opt-out option means they face contractual difficulties, such as a breach of contract.

Mr Weir
I understand what the Minister is saying, but as it stands clause 121 says that there can be a switch to a different supplier or different terms, “unless the customer objects”. The customer can always come back and say, “No, I don’t want to do that”; even though the company is saying, “This is a better tariff for you”, the customer still has the ability to do that. The difficulty with including subsection 3(e)(ii) is that, as the regulatory impact assessment said, very many customers never get round to switching and do not react when they are given offers or told a better deal is available. Leaving that provision in would allow companies simply to offer customers these things but not push them forward.

Michael Fallon
There may well be consumers who are not aware that they are being left on these tariffs, so we need to be careful about that, too. Ofgem could, however, deal with such matters, and I want to make it absolutely clear that the decision on whether to take an opt-out approach or an opt-in one will be made by the Secretary of State, or by Ofgem acting on his behalf, and not by energy suppliers.

Amendment 22 would add a new power for the Secretary of State in relation to customers with pre-payment meters, and there is a difficulty with it, too. The amendment is in two parts: paragraph (f)(i) specifies that these customers should receive the lowest tariff offered by the supplier, regardless of meter type; and sub-paragraph (ii) specifies that no more than 20% of each of their payments should go toward repaying existing debts.

Clearly, the aim of the amendment is to help out the most vulnerable customers, and I wholeheartedly support that. The Government are keen to see that consumers who use pre-payment meters are not disadvantaged, particularly the 20% of the fuel poor who currently pay for their gas or electricity in this way. Since 2010, there has been a major step forward in the treatment of consumers with pre-payment meters, with all the large energy suppliers choosing to equalise their pre-payment tariffs with standard credit prices.

The second part of the amendment relates to changing the way debt is repaid by customers on pre-payment meters. Customers in this situation currently repay a fixed amount at fixed intervals, for example, each week. The amount repaid is calculated for each consumer on the basis of their personal circumstances and ability to pay. The amendment proposes a limit of no more than 20% of the top-up amount, which in practice would turn most or all repayments from a fixed rate to a proportional one.

There are at least three reasons why we should not legislate in that way, the first of which is the cost to consumers of changing meters to accommodate such a provision. Secondly, let us consider the following: if a family paid a total of £10 a week, with 20% going towards repaying the debt, it would take the family seven years to clear the debt. This plan would also require the family to continue to pay £10 a week or £20 a week during the summer months, when most   pre-payment meter customers use very little gas. If they reduce the total weekly payment in that period, the overall repayment period of the debt will, of course, increase again. Thirdly, there are existing obligations on suppliers under their licence to take into account a customer’s ability to repay when setting a repayment schedule. Suppliers are currently obliged to develop individualised repayment plans that take account of ability to pay, but existing pre-payment meters are not designed to allow for debt levels to be deducted on a proportional basis.

Mr Weir
I understand what the Minister is saying and I understand his objection, but if he looks at the excellent report on the issue from Citizens Advice he will see that it gives an example of someone who had £7 of every £10 put into the meter taken towards debt. We are trying to introduce a limit—although perhaps 20% is the wrong figure—so that that sort of thing does not happen.

17:45:00

Michael Fallon
I will certainly look at that. I understand the purpose behind the hon. Gentleman’s amendment and I share it, but I hope that he will recognise that a percentage cap might not be the best answer. There might be other opportunities to return to the issue as the Bill progresses, and I hope that he understands the risk that setting a percentage limit could encourage suppliers to use that limit as a default position.

I do not think a legislative solution is appropriate, but we are investigating with suppliers what non-legislative action can be taken to improve the situation with prepayment meters. We have also recently announced funding for the big energy saving network, which is a co-ordinated network of voluntary organisations and community groups that will develop and deliver support for vulnerable consumers.

I am grateful to the hon. Gentleman for his continued interest in getting a better deal for consumers. I hope that he has found my explanation on the amendments reassuring and will, on that basis, agree for the moment to withdraw them. I apologise to you, Mr Deputy Speaker, and to the House for taking an inordinate amount of time to respond to the amendments, but the group contains a range of amendments from a large number of hon. Members and I wanted to do justice to each one of them.

Tom Greatrex (Rutherglen and Hamilton West) (Lab/Co-op)
I welcome the Minister to his first parliamentary interaction with the Bill. His predecessor, the right hon. Member for South Holland and The Deepings (Mr Hayes), took the Bill through Committee and we know from our experience today that the Minister can speak—although perhaps in slightly less florid language—for at least as long as his predecessor could on such matters.

A range of issues are covered by this group of amendments, and I am conscious that many Members want to speak about their amendments. I shall do my best to be as brief as possible, but I want to mention a few points both in response to the Minister’s speech and in support of some of the amendments tabled by me and my right hon. and hon. Friends.

I welcome Government amendment 66, which will put in place a five-year review of the emissions performance standard. That is very important. I am sure that my hon. Friend the Member for Brent North (Barry Gardiner) will try to catch your eye, Mr Deputy Speaker, to speak in support of his amendment 150. I hope that the Minister will take that seriously in the context of the length of the grandfathering period—gas investors suggest that their investment is usually over 30 years rather than 45—and give it a degree of consideration.

In relation to the EPS, let me say a few words about amendment 179 on carbon capture and storage. The provisions in chapter 8 on the EPS will have a significant impact on the future development of CCS. The Opposition have consistently and clearly set out our support for developing that technology, which we believe has a vital role to play in our future energy mix alongside other low-carbon technologies. We do not need to go over the same ground again, but I probably first raised with the Minister’s predecessor but one some of the issues about the £1 billion that was supposedly available for capital funding. We know what the Cabinet Office document said was available for this comprehensive spending review period, although I am conscious that the Minister’s Department—or one of his Departments, the Department of Energy and Climate Change—seems to have secured its negotiations with the Treasury on the CSR. I wonder whether the remainder of that £1 billion is part of the savings that have been offered up.

If we do not get the technology developed for CCS, we will face a significant gap in our ability properly to deal with the peaks in our generation requirements. That is why we tabled amendment 179. As the hon. Member for Warrington South (David Mowat) perhaps suggested in his intervention about carbon capture and storage, we are conscious that there have been bumps in the road in moving that technology towards commercial development; I think it is fair to put it in those terms. We are concerned, as are a number of industry bodies, that an unintended consequence of the Bill is that it makes that technology less likely to be developed.

The Minister was right to say that the exemption was in the draft Bill, but was taken out as a result of concerns, expressed by the Select Committee on Energy and Climate Change and others, that it could be a loophole allowing unabated coal generation. The way in which the amendment is framed—it relates to a specific commissioning period—helps to address that sensibly, and to ensure that CCS is given the best chance of developing and being part of the future-generation mix, as many of us wish it to be. I therefore intend to push amendment 179 to a Division.

There are a number of amendments relating to contracts for difference. I am sure that the hon. Member for Brighton, Pavilion (Caroline Lucas) and others will seek to speak to some of them. I wanted to say a word on new schedule 1 and new clause 5, which stand in the name of the hon. Member for Cheltenham (Martin Horwood) and a number of other Members from across the House, on establishing a panel of independent experts to offer advice and guidance to the Government before they enter into a CFD. Although the Minister was not on the Committee, I am sure that he is familiar with the tenor of our debates on the subject; we tabled a number of similar amendments in Committee, and  argued strongly for an independent expert panel to offer transparency, expertise and, crucially, protection for consumers. That differs from the Government’s plan to set up a non-statutory panel, and would deal with the concerns that the non-statutory proposals do not go far enough.

I am sure that the Minister will be aware that in Committee we argued that for many people this is still a controversial issue. The best way to ensure confidence in the negotiations that are under way—I think I heard the Minister refer to “when”, rather than “if”, the contract is secured; I am not sure whether that was a Freudian slip—is to ensure transparency around the process. Having that panel is a sensible way of providing scrutiny and transparency. If those Members who tabled the amendment seek to push it to a Division, they will have the support of Labour Members.

On a related issue, amendments 8 and 9, which are in my name and the name of my right hon. Friend the Member for Don Valley (Caroline Flint) and my hon. Friend the Member for Liverpool, Wavertree (Luciana Berger), push the Government to be more transparent about agreements with generators through investment contracts. It would be churlish of me not to recognise that the Government have moved on the issue since Committee, and have listened to what the Opposition said in Committee about what information could be restricted. I listened carefully to what the Minister said about the information that is not made available being described. However, I am unconvinced that that goes as far as it could or should. I take the point that it may be appropriate for certain information not to be put in the public domain, particularly when we are dealing with nuclear energy, but that should be the very limited exception, rather than the rule. That is why amendments 8 and 9 make it clear that the exception will be for “trade secrets”, rather than “confidential information”, as the Government could decide what was, or was not, confidential. That is important for transparency and confidence.

The Minister will be aware that the representative of EDF Energy who gave evidence at the start of Committee proceedings was very clear about the importance of transparency. It would be slightly odd if the Government sought to restrict that transparency. We will never have the confidence that we should have in nuclear as part of our generation mix if people are able to gainsay aspects of agreements between the Government and companies. The best way of ensuring that that does not happen is to make all the information available; people can then make their judgments. I am sure that that would not stop some Members from being against nuclear power, but it would give a number of others—and, more importantly, people more widely—confidence that nuclear should continue to be part of our generation mix.

David Mowat
I have listened carefully to what the hon. Gentleman said about the need for an expert panel, and all that that implies. Is it the position of the Opposition Front Benchers that the Government should not be able to enter into a binding contract with EDF, after negotiating with it in good faith, without that coming back to Parliament?

Tom Greatrex
I understand, from what the Minister said, and what his predecessor said in Committee, that the agreed contract will come before Parliament, and   I would expect that to happen, but an expert panel that included consumer representatives could help to bring a degree of rigour and transparency that will be important in ensuring that there is confidence if—or when, to use the Minister’s term—an agreement is reached.

David Mowat
Does the hon. Gentleman envisage the Government coming to an agreement with EDF that is subject to ratification by some panel? Would he expect EDF to negotiate on that basis?

Tom Greatrex
I expect that EDF would want the Government to be sure that the agreement that they were entering into was safe and sound, and conformed to the best possible degree of scrutiny. An expert panel could bring some of that scrutiny, rigour and analysis. That is, in the end, in the interests of not just the Government and EDF or any other company, but the whole energy sector. That is an important point that we pushed in Committee and will continue to push today.

Martin Horwood
I thank the hon. Gentleman for his support for my new schedule 1. In answer to the point just made, the schedule does not provide for a veto by Parliament on the contract for difference, but it does expect the Secretary of State to lay before Parliament written reasons why he disagreed with the advice of the expert panel, in the event of such a disagreement. It therefore provides greater assurance of scrutiny and transparency.

Tom Greatrex
I am grateful for that clarification. I hope that helps to address the point that the hon. Member for Warrington South sought to make; it also underlines the importance of the measure. It is possible and probable that the Government would come to a conclusion that members of the expert panel did not share, but as long as that was explained, I would not necessarily think that it was a problem. It may well be that the expert panel would come to a conclusion that the hon. Gentleman and others disagreed with and I agreed with, or vice versa. It is important that there is a degree of transparency and rigour in the process. That is why we will support new clause 5 and new schedule 1, if the hon. Member for Cheltenham divides the House on them.

The Minister touched on the capacity market and the amendments in the name of my hon. Friend the Member for Southampton, Test (Dr Whitehead) relating to the strategic reserve. The Minister seemed to use the same defence that we heard in Committee—that introducing a power to have a strategic reserve would send confusing signals. Indeed, his predecessor said:

“The new clause would allow us to have both a strategic reserve and a capacity mechanism. That might be the worst possible option, because it would send a confused signal to investors about the Government’s intentions.”––[Official Report, Energy Public Bill Committee, 24 January 2013; c. 329.]

The Government argued in Committee that it would be wrong to give the Secretary of State the power to introduce a new system or mechanism in future, as it would cause uncertainty. That is very different from the stance taken by the Government in the amendments that we will discuss tomorrow on 2030 decarbonisation, which give the Secretary of State a power to set a target if he so chooses, so the argument does not stand up to scrutiny. There are important points relating to a strategic  reserve that I am sure my hon. Friend the Member for Southampton, Test will seek to make. I do not think that having that power in the Bill will necessarily have the impact that the Minister suggests.

A number of amendments relating to biomass have been tabled. It was the Minister’s predecessor who took through Parliament the statutory instrument dealing with the renewables obligation earlier this year. He made a number of commitments in relation to biomass, as I gently remind this Minister, in case they were missed in the comprehensive handover that no doubt took place earlier this year. His predecessor undertook to seek from those using biomass to generate power details about the sourcing of the biomass, and to make that information more widely available.

18:00:00

At that stage, I believe, the correspondence had been sent out. I am not sure whether it has come back and whether it can be shared, but that would do this debate a service, as it has been characterised by conflicting evidence. It is difficult to make a coherent and comprehensive judgment on biomass and on some of the concerns expressed in the amendments before us without being able to reconcile the discrepancies in the evidence.

The Minister’s predecessor also suggested that he would form an expert group that he said would meet before the end of the month. That month was March. Again, I am not sure whether the expert group has yet met. I would be grateful if the Minister could provide more information about that. The issue has received attention in the recent past because of conflicting information and evidence, and if we want to be sure about the place of sustainable biomass within our generation mix, we need to ensure that the evidence on which those judgments are based is comprehensive and clear. The Government could usefully undertake that task.

The Minister’s predecessor also made a commitment to look at the difference between imported and indigenous biomass supply. Again, I seek further information about that from the Minister.

Dan Byles (North Warwickshire) (Con)
The hon. Gentleman is probably aware that the Energy and Climate Change Committee recently had a one-off session on biomass. We concluded that this is almost certainly an issue that the Select Committee will revisit in more detail because, as he said, there is differing evidence that needs to be thoroughly teased out. Sadly, however, the results will come too late to inform this debate.

Tom Greatrex
I thank the hon. Gentleman for his intervention. I am pleased to hear that the Select Committee will be examining the matter further. I should have said that the Committee did the Bill a great service through its pre-legislative scrutiny. We will return to some of the issues on which he, as a member of the Committee, may have supported the conclusions but may not vote in line with them tomorrow. The Committee has done good work on the Bill overall and I am pleased to hear that it will do further work. It is important that we get greater clarity so that the debate is properly informed.

Finally, I shall touch on the clauses relating to tariffs, which have been grouped with the wider electricity market reform amendments. I need not remind the  House that it was seven and a half months ago that the Prime Minister stood at the Dispatch Box and announced that the Government would force energy companies by law to put everybody on the cheapest tariff. For the avoidance of doubt, his exact words were:

“I can announce…that we will be legislating so that energy companies have to give the lowest tariff to their customers”—[Official Report, 17 October 2012; Vol. 551, c. 316.]

The Bill in its 200-odd pages contains no provision to put every customer automatically on the cheapest tariff. Indeed, what the Minister said in his remarks and what his ministerial colleague said on the radio at the weekend and in Committee was slightly different—that tariffs would be in line with customers’ preferences.

The intriguing source of Tory energy policy who has been busy entering the world of Twitter today talking about the impact of the measures in the Bill on consumer bills is using a figure which Ofgem suggested would be the case if every person were automatically put on the lowest tariff. If that means that the Minister is suggesting that that is the case, his amendments are deficient because they do not do what the Prime Minister said and what the Prime Minister and others have repeated in the Chamber 12 times since last October. I noticed that the Minister chose his words carefully and said “in line with”. If he is not doing as the Prime Minister said, I anticipate that the Prime Minister may seek to correct the record later in the week when we have the opportunity to ask him about that.

The Bill addresses some aspects of the energy market but there is a huge gap in it, as it does not deal properly with the retail market. We flagged up that gap in Committee and we have been clear and consistent in our stance. We want to see the Bill as the mechanism for ensuring that we get the right level of investment in our energy infrastructure. There are other issues that will be raised in another place, but the heart of the problem is how our energy is bought and sold. That is not addressed properly in the Bill. This sticking plaster attempt to implement what the Prime Minister said in October—he was particularly flustered that afternoon, as I remember it—is patently not achieved by the measures to which the Minister spoke today.

There are real reforms that could and should happen in relation to the retail market. At a time when the Bill seeks to change other aspects of the energy market, it seems odd that we are not dealing properly with the retail market, which would provide greater clarity and transparency going forward.

During the course of the Bill’s passage, we have not opposed for the sake of opposition. We will continue in that vein, as I am sure will others in another place. We have sought to be constructive in the amendments that we tabled to try to improve the framework offered by the Bill. There is a considerable amount of information that is not available to us to scrutinise. I heard the Minister say that information would be published at a later date in secondary legislation, but we are conducting our scrutiny in Committee and on Report without information that would have been appropriate.

The Minister’s predecessor undertook to publish some of that secondary legislation in draft, but that never quite happened. No doubt Members in another place will seek some of that information. Although the Bill sets out the framework for contracts for difference,  some of the crucial detail about the operation and the capacity market is not available for us to scrutinise. To be able to make a sound evidence-based and comprehensive judgment of the content of the Bill, we need a degree of detail that is still missing.

Although I accept what the Minister said about the affirmative resolution procedure being used, he is obviously aware that without some of that information it is difficult to test some aspects of the Bill. I am sure other Members who speak in the next 53 minutes will make the same point. We are reliant on the Minister’s words. I have no doubt that he is sincere in his comments about the Bill to the House, but he is the third person to occupy his role in the past eight months, and those in the role have not always said precisely the same thing. The degree of confidence, clarity and certainty needed to transform the Government’s agenda and intentions for the Bill into reality requires a great deal more information to enable us to make that sound judgment. I hope the Minister will provide that information in another place to enable the Bill to address our shared concerns and to ensure that we get security of supply and a reduction in carbon emissions, and the most affordable way of doing those things.

Several hon. Members
rose—

Madam Deputy Speaker (Dawn Primarolo)
Order. I remind the House that the debate must end at 7 o’clock. Quite a few Members wish to participate in the debate, so I ask each Member to make their contribution briefly so that we can facilitate as many contributions as possible.

Chris Heaton-Harris (Daventry) (Con)
I will certainly obey your request, Madam Deputy Speaker, and skate through what I have to say. I should declare an interest at the very beginning, because I run a campaign outside the House. It is a not-for-profit company and I do not take a salary or any expenses, but I declare an interest, in the spirit of the time and in the hope that others pushing amendments may do exactly the same later.

I was pleased to hear the Minister address many of the concerns that I have raised in my amendments. I did not bang on about the thing that most would have expected me to bang on about in my amendments. I believe that the Minister agreed with one of them, and just wanted to check; I am slightly concerned that that might be the case. Alas, it was not the amendment that I really wanted him to agree with—amendment 169, which concerns the costs to consumers of the outcomes of the Bill.

The motivation of my amendments was simple: to include a reference to the consumer interest and force the Secretary of State and the Government to have regard to that, and to require much greater transparency about the contracts created and the costs imposed by the Energy Bill. We all know that the Bill came out of the Government’s electricity market reform process, which began in 2010 and had three elements. The first is the carbon price floor, which has been introduced by the Finance Act 2013 and sets out a path for a minimum carbon price in the UK from the fiscal year 2013-14 from £16 per tonne to £30 by 2020.

There is a new renewable and nuclear subsidy mechanism. The Government will replace the existing regime with a contract for difference mechanism. This new mechanism will very largely transfer the price risk from the developer  to the consumer by guaranteeing an achieved power sale price for each power station covered. Unlike the renewables obligation, the new contract for difference mechanism will also provide subsidy support to the developer of new nuclear, about which I know other Members have concerns.

Another strand is that the Government will create a capacity market that will seek to ensure the retention of sufficient existing generation capacity and the building of new capacity. The design of the capacity market is still ongoing, so the exact nature of the market in the future is unclear, and we do not know when it is planned to hold the first capacity auction. I believe that it will potentially be in 2014 for delivery in 2018. Then there are the bits about emission performance standards to talk about.

Realistically, though, there is an overall problem with the Bill, which was highlighted by the Opposition’s general agreement. It is a kind of renationalisation of the power sector—very, very nearly. To deliver their policy goals the Government require utility companies and third-party investors to build assets that are fundamentally not economic, often in technologies that are far from robust or mature. The Government have taken upon themselves the responsibility of deciding which generation technologies are bad, such as coal and unabated gas, and which are good, such as hydro or nuclear or wind perhaps. They have also decided the pace of change, that coal should largely be removed from the power matrix by 2024, and that unabated gas should operate only at peak from 2027. They have decided which future technologies should or should not be developed and are pushing forward with a leap of faith on as yet completely unproven technologies, as we have heard before, including carbon capture and storage.

The Bill will take Government intervention up yet another level. Under the powers granted by the Bill, the Department of Energy and Climate Change will allocate contracts for difference to developers in those technologies and at those locations that DECC favours. It will set the strike price and so determine the revenue of the asset, what the consumer pays and the returns on investment. It is very much a centralising measure. I am not convinced that it gives the opportunities for new sources that bubble up, as we might perhaps say in this case.

Graham Stringer (Blackley and Broughton) (Lab)
We might have an ideological difference if the Bill was actually nationalising the energy industry, but it is not; it is doing something far worse. It is guaranteeing profits for parts of the energy industry that have been chosen from a limited intellectual base. Does the hon. Gentleman agree that by picking so-called winners, which may be losers, the Bill is squeezing out money that could have been spent on research for better newer technologies?

18:15:00

Chris Heaton-Harris
I do agree. Let us look at what has just happened in America with the advent of shale gas and the development of non-conventional gas and oil exploration in the US. That has essentially destroyed the notion that the world has already hit peak oil or peak gas. If we compare projected gas prices—the Minister mentioned this—with what is happening in markets where unconventional gas is being developed quickly,   we see that new developments could come forward if allowed in the future. I fear that we are picking winners on that basis. I know that all Members are concerned about greenhouse emissions and the like. The development of shale gas in the United States has reduced America’s greenhouse emissions. Therefore, there is an interesting benefit from doing these things.

To deliver the Government’s plans in the Bill will be hugely challenging, but they are even more challenging because there is a whole host of factors. If renewable technologies were easy to deploy at the utility scale, the Bill might be helpful, but they are not. If renewable technologies were economic to deploy, the Bill would be very helpful, but as of yet they are not. If nuclear power stations could be built quickly and economically, the Bill would help, but in the UK we struggle with building quickly and economically on that sort of scale. It may have been done overseas, such as in Finland, but, realistically, we cannot do that. If the public were willing to pay any price in their bills to fund this policy—this is my major concern, hence my amendment 169—the Bill might be helpful, but they are not willing to pay huge extra sums. These provisions are placing a huge extra regular contribution on bills, up to an estimated £600 each year by 2020 at the very least.

Mr Brian Binley (Northampton South) (Con)
Was my hon. Friend also surprised at the lack of reference to the impact on business in this country over the next 20 years? The Chancellor wants growth, yet the Bill will impede the ability to get that growth. Will my hon. Friend say a word about that?

Chris Heaton-Harris
I dare not say a word about small businesses in the presence of my hon. Friend, the champion of small business in the House. When I used to run my own small business, the power bill was one of the biggest items that could not be avoided, and the Bill will increase that.

The Bill does not help with the core concerns of many in the House about fuel poverty. Reliable estimates of fuel poverty are difficult to come by because the Department has been hedging its bets on publishing any detail. The latest estimates are for 2010 when 3.5 million households in England and 4.75 million across the UK were thought to be in fuel poverty, based on the 2012 poverty statistics released by DECC. The latest dataset used by the House of Commons Library to estimate the impact of changes to prices is for 2009. This suggests that the increased cost of electricity due to the renewables obligation alone may have pushed 100,000 households into fuel poverty. We should be very aware what we are doing when we increase the cost to consumers of their energy. It powers everything from broadband to their heating, and many other things essential to the country’s development, and we should be very aware about how it works.

David Mowat
I accept the thrust of what my hon. Friend says on matters such as fuel poverty, but I rise to defend the Bill a little. Does he accept that we have to cut carbon? If so, does he accept that the way set out in the Bill is a path forward towards that?

Chris Heaton-Harris
Yes, I accept that we need to be aware of our carbon emissions, and I actually think that being responsible for the environment and trying to  deliver the best for it is a Conservative principle. The Bill has some good elements to it, but the centralisation that I mentioned and the increased costs to consumers, businesses and the like are outcomes that we should think more about. I will happily leave my contribution there so that other Members can speak.

Dr Alan Whitehead (Southampton, Test) (Lab)
I rise to speak to my amendments 48 to 50, which, as we have heard from Minister, are concerned with the development of a capacity market intended to ensure that we have the range of capacity that we will require over the coming years and decades. Not to put too fine a point on it, it is intended to ensure that the lights stay on and that there is a decent margin between what people demand and what we supply.

A capacity market is a choice. It is not the only option available to secure the necessary capacity for the future. It seems to me that that choice needs to be based not just on whether the right capacity margin can be maintained. We should also ask at what cost it can be done, with what reliability and at what risk. I suggest that the choice of mechanism for maintaining capacity that is being made in the Bill fails on all those counts.

I have not invented that conclusion; the Department itself produced an impact assessment on the two choices that it had considered for securing capacity—a strategic reserve arrangement and a capacity market arrangement. Among other things, that choice is about ensuring that the amount of money that can be obtained through the sale of power into the market at times when capacity is tight stays within reasonable bounds. The impact assessment suggested that, in future, those reasonable bounds might get larger and larger. At the moment there is a maximum of about £1,000 per megawatt-hour, but it could go up as high as £10,000, in which case the consumer would be paying an enormous amount for their electricity under certain circumstances. The whole idea of keeping the costs of the capacity market under control would be completely overthrown.

The question then arises: which method best suits the need both to keep the right capacity and to keep it at a reasonable price and with reasonable reliability? Hon. Members will not be surprised that costs of the capacity market option over the period 2010 to 2030 have been assessed at two and a half times those of the strategic reserve option, and the effect on bills at 11 times higher. At first sight, that is not a good sign of the capacity market’s ability to provide a good deal for consumers.

According to the impact assessment, the reason why the Department eventually chose the capacity market idea was the entirely theoretical one that a reliability market

“limits the scope for generators to receive scarcity rents.”

However, the fact is that by introducing a capacity market and auction system in the way that we are, we will effectively provide guaranteed free money for a long period for people who are building conventional generation that provides capacity.

It may come as a surprise to some hon. Members that by introducing an auction market for capacity, we are ensuring that there is a subsidy across all aspects of energy generation, not just some. There is potential for  gaming of that arrangement. The Government will have to decide how tight the capacity is after considering what the market will look like four years ahead, and then they will have to create an auction. That choice will be necessary for the auction to take place at all, and it will determine how much money there is in the auction. If the market is gamed so that the capacity looks much tighter than it is, the amount of money will be larger and the price will be even higher.

It is no coincidence—I think that is the best way I can phrase it—that we already see the capacity market tightening. A large number of gas plants are going into either deep or shallow mothballing in advance of 2014, and the Government’s decision about what capacity will look like will be informed by that mothballing. Were I an energy company operative, I would be rather pleased about that, because I would imagine that I would do rather well out of a capacity market in the future.

Mark Reckless (Rochester and Strood) (Con)
Surely an even more important reason for the tightening of capacity to which the hon. Gentleman refers is the shutting down of several large coal-fired power stations under the relevant EU directive.

Dr Whitehead
Yes, indeed. A number of plants are to close down over the next few years, and given how the energy market works, which I have described, one would expect the ability to obtain rents at the margins of the market to encourage the development of new plant. The statement made by the development of a capacity market auction is that that mechanism will not exist, so a permanent underwriting of new plant development needs to be auctioned to allow that to take place.

The strategic reserve option, which works quite well in a number of parts of the world, is that certain plant—perhaps mothballed plant—is taken out of the market and then placed back into it at times of stress on the market. As a result of that action, rents are reduced. Indeed, the fact that there is a strategic reserve that can be put back into the market at stressful points damps down the possibility of rents being obtained. That option comes at a much lower cost and

“should be relatively simple to set up and administer as it is a relatively small intervention in the market”—

not my words but those of the impact assessment. It

“could avoid gaming in the capacity market if there is a plentiful supply of mothballed plant”,

as indeed there is right now. Overall, it

“has the potential to be the smallest intervention in the market and accordingly has least overall policy design and implementation risk associated with it.”

The capacity market, on the other hand,

“has a higher overall level of design risk given the relative complexity of the model…a Capacity Market, if not well designed, could create opportunities for gaming the new capacity auctions; and…is the more costly mechanism to set up and run and it puts a greater administrative burden on businesses who will participate in the capacity market.”

Again, those are not my words but those of the departmental impact assessment of the choice between a strategic reserve and a capacity market.

Yet a capacity market was chosen to underpin the entire energy market reform and the Bill. I imagine—in fact, I am pretty certain—that that is what we will eventually go for. However, I modestly suggest that it  might be a good idea to put in the Bill the idea that if that does not work very well, as I also modestly suggest it probably will not, the Minister has the option of moving towards a strategic reserve arrangement. That would keep the costs down and damp down the gaming of the capacity market auctions that may well take place over the next few years. That would be helpful for our ability to run a coherent energy policy over the next few years, and I tabled my amendments in the spirit of that helpfulness and to ensure that, whichever way we decide to go, we do not shut the door on something that is cheap for consumers in the long term, better for the energy market overall, and will keep our energy supplies in good shape for the future.

18:30:00

Martin Horwood
First, let me make it clear, particularly to Ministers, that I support the Bill. The attempt to lock investment in low carbon technologies into British energy markets is vital and demands an interventionist approach. In a sense, I agreed with a lot of what the hon. Member for Daventry (Chris Heaton-Harris) said in describing what are in effect subsidies and quite an interventionist approach in the Bill—something I think is justified for renewables and when bringing forward clean, greener technologies to tackle the urgent question of climate change. I also welcome the important Government amendments that try to ensure that consumers enjoy the lowest possible tariffs.

As is obvious from the debate, there is a growing chorus of scepticism about aspects of the Bill, and particularly subsidies that may be unearned. New clause 5 and new schedule 1 seek to address that issue, which is why I will press new clause 5 to a vote. I have managed to gather support for the new clause, and I acknowledge that of Which?, the Royal Society for the Protection of Birds, the Association for the Conservation of Energy, WWF, Friends of the Earth and Greenpeace, as well as my right hon. Friend the Member for Hazel Grove (Andrew Stunell) and the hon. Members for Stoke-on-Trent North (Joan Walley), for Brighton, Pavilion (Caroline Lucas), for Hove (Mike Weatherley), for Angus (Mr Weir) and for Rutherglen and Hamilton West (Tom Greatrex). I am grateful for support across the House, and for the implied support from Members close to the hon. Member for Daventry who are concerned about subsidies in general but include in that their particular concerns about nuclear power.

My worry is principally about nuclear because the subsidies in the Bill contravene the spirit of the coalition agreement. That agreement distinguished between renewables, where it implicitly accepted there was a case for subsidy, and the nuclear industry, for which it specifically ruled out a subsidy. Only a few years ago, the Labour Government line was also that there should be no subsidy for the new generation of nuclear power.

Amendment 23 and others tabled by the hon. Member for Brighton, Pavilion are specifically anti-nuclear, and there is a case to be made for distinguishing between nuclear and renewables, principally because renewables are emerging technologies. In many cases they are highly competitive, and over time they are generally getting cheaper. Nuclear is an old industry—56 years old—and has generally been getting more and more expensive. The latest new reactors at Olkiluoto—I hope hon. Members will excuse my Finnish pronunciation—and Flamanville in France are both many years behind schedule, and  from the original estimates of between €3 billion and €4 billion are now heading towards estimates of more than €8 billion each—more than 100% over budget. I gather that the Finns and the French are now in litigation with each other over some of those costs and time overruns.

Mark Reckless
The hon. Gentleman refers to nuclear energy becoming more expensive, but I am not sure whether, like the hon. Member for Rutherglen and Hamilton West (Tom Greatrex), he caught the Minister’s earlier reference to when the new nuclear contract is signed with EDF. Does he think that reference to when, rather than if, is likely to increase or decrease the price we pay for that electricity?

Martin Horwood
Perhaps courses in negotiating skills might be recommended for members of the Department of Energy and Climate Change on that front. To be fair, Ministers have made it clear that they do not intend to sign the contract with EDF at any price, but the difficulty is that we in Parliament simply do not know that there has not been adequate scrutiny.

David Mowat
Will the hon. Gentleman give way?

Martin Horwood
I think Madam Deputy Speaker will catch me with her rather steely eye if I give way too many times, so I will move on.

In the UK, the nuclear industry is not very competitive and is overwhelmingly dominated by one nationalised industry supplier—Electricité de France. There are risks that we are in effect organising a massive transfer of funds from British bill payers, if not taxpayers, to a French nationalised industry of dubious profitability. The scale of that possible subsidy has been underlined by former Friends of the Earth directors, including Tom Burke who said:

“At a strike price of £100/MW and a 30-year contract life this would require a subsidy of £1 billion/year above today’s wholesale price for electricity. This would lead to a transfer of £30 billion to EDF from Britain’s householders and businesses. Should the whole of the 16GW of new nuclear anticipated by the Energy Minister be financed on similar terms it would cost householders and businesses £150 billion by 2050.”

That is an enormous commitment that we must scrutinise and ensure that value for money is inserted into the process.

David Mowat
Specifically on that point, the hon. Gentleman says that a strike price of 10 is unacceptable. Would he extend that to offshore wind?

Martin Horwood
I did not say 10, I said 100, and figures as high as 165 have been discussed and contract times as long as 40 years speculated about. The Minister has been unable to reassure us about that in the debate. It is true that high prices are talked about for offshore wind, but that is an emerging and quite competitive technology that deserves support. It is not a 56-year-old technology that has already proved to have a massive record of cost and time overruns. I am happy with supporting offshore wind but unhappy with supporting nuclear.

The effect of new clause 5 and a panel of expert scrutiny would be to ensure that all technologies negotiating contracts for difference were subject to scrutiny, including offshore wind and other renewables. New clause 5 and  new schedule 1 are not specifically anti-nuclear, but they are anti-unearned subsidies. The Energy and Climate Change Committee called for that in its report, and Which? addressed it in the drafting of these provisions—I am grateful for that. Such scrutiny and transparency are particularly relevant when, as the Committee pointed out, a mature technology dominated by a single large supplier means there is little competitive pressure and the strike price naturally tends to rise in such a situation—even more so, as the hon. Member for Rochester and Strood (Mark Reckless) pointed out, if one side has almost conceded that it needs to sign the contract at the end of the process.

Alternatives have been discussed, such as scrutiny by the National Audit Office and others, and in a parliamentary debate some months ago it was suggested that the Public Accounts Committee play a role in this kind of scrutiny. The problem with all these suggestions, however, is that they investigate after the event. As I said in my intervention on the Minister, if we are talking about a contract of 20 or 30 years, it is practically useless to investigate whether it is good value after the event because we are locked into it for a whole generation. Right now, negotiations are under way with EDF for this contract.

New clause 5 and new schedule 1 would establish an independent expert panel, which would differ from the expert panel that the Government have already established. As the affordable energy campaign by Which? pointed out:

“A panel of technical experts has been established by the Government to scrutinise the evidence National Grid presents for the setting of CfD strike prices. However this panel does not have a sufficiently broad role. For example, it does not have value for money as part of its remit. The panel must have a clearly defined oversight role set out in the Bill”.

If the Government support the concept of an expert panel, why on earth can they not put it in the Bill, as defined in new clause 5 and new schedule 1? I would have thought they would have absolutely nothing to fear from that.

New clause 5 and new schedule 1 are in the same spirit as amendment 162, although I do not buy everything the hon. Member for Daventry said in support of his proposals. However, energy bills are a major cause for concern among consumers—all hon. Members know that. Whether we are proposing renewables or nuclear, a strong case needs to be made, and transparency and accountability need to be at the forefront. Consumers need a good deal as well as a green deal. The Bill does not guarantee to deliver that, which is why I shall press new clause 5 to a Division.

Caroline Lucas
I rise to speak to my proposals and give notice that I will press amendment 24 to a Division.

I am pleased to follow the hon. Member for Cheltenham (Martin Horwood), who made a compelling case, demonstrating that, even if the word “subsidy” does not appear in the document, we are talking about a public subsidy for nuclear, which goes against the coalition agreement. The bulk of my proposals on new nuclear simply seek to return us to the coalition agreement, which said that new nuclear should receive no public subsidy. Many people are hugely disappointed that Ministers are ditching their commitment so shamelessly.

A Government who genuinely want to tackle high electricity bills would not sign taxpayers and bill payers up to a 35 or 40-year contract—we do not know how long the contract will be for, but that is the ballpark figure out there. The contract would also involve paying around twice the current market price for power. As has been said, that money will line the coffers of French nuclear corporations.

If we were serious about tackling fuel poverty, we would not be going down that route, yet that is precisely what the complex mechanisms for providing financial support for nuclear in the Bill do. We should add the liability cap, underwriting, and indirect subsidies such as for decommissioning and for the unsolved waste problem. Essentially, we are writing a blank cheque for an expensive, inflexible old technology that we cannot afford and simply do not need.

A Government who were serious about tackling fuel poverty and high energy costs would instead pursue more effective ways of meeting our energy needs and decarbonising our power sector, namely through renewable energy, energy efficiency, demand reduction, and demand-side measures such as energy storage, genuinely smart grids and interconnectors.

The UK has the potential to be a massive industrial leader in renewables and efficiency—solutions that could deliver huge cost reductions and a substantial boost to the UK economic recovery, manufacturing and jobs, yet the Bill goes in the opposite direction. Moreover, the secrecy of the Department of Energy and Climate Change negotiations with EDF further undermines confidence in the credibility of the Government’s claims that the deal represents value for money for consumers.

Even if hon. Members are happy for the coalition to break its promise of no public subsidy for nuclear, one would hope that they had some interest in the Minister’s claim that any deal reached would be fair, affordable and value for money. Nuclear costs more than the alternatives and does not represent value for money. We have the opportunity to test that via the expert panel, or by giving the National Audit Office a role in ascertaining value for money, which one of my amendments would do, but Ministers do not look favourably on those proposals.

The truth is that nuclear is a mature technology that has enjoyed nearly 60 years of support. Despite that, the price tag keeps going up. The hon. Member for Cheltenham mentioned the price of nuclear in Finland and France. We should compare that with the fact that the costs of renewables are falling across the board. Last month, Citi Investment Research and Analysis highlighted that, in many cases, renewables are at cost parity with established forms of electricity generation. Recent analysis by Bloomberg New Energy Finance found that the levelised cost of onshore wind had fallen dramatically in recent years, that the best onshore wind farms in the world currently produce power as economically as coal, gas and nuclear generators, and that the average onshore wind farm will reach grid parity by 2016.

That is the point of my first three proposals. They are not anti-nuclear; they would simply ensure that Minister’s warm words on cost-effectiveness and value for money for bill payers were kept. They would also introduce transparency to a shockingly opaque process. If nuclear power is as cost-effective as we are told, I can see no reason why hon. Members would not support my proposals  to ensure it. Amendment 24, which has cross-party support, would simply ensure that payments under a CFD for nuclear electricity are not greater than payments for any form of renewable generation, in terms of price per megawatt-hour and taking into account the length of the contract provided.

Amendments 26 and 27 deal with transparency and parliamentary scrutiny of investment contracts and CFDs. They are essential if the public and the House are to have any hope of deciding for themselves whether the terms provide anywhere near value for money compared with alternatives. They would require the Secretary of State to ask the NAO and Parliament to examine whether the contracts represent value for money, in line with the motion debated in a Backbench Business Committee debate on 7 February, and a letter sent recently to the NAO by a cross-party group of MPs and academics.

18:45:00

Amendments 23 and 25 are more far-reaching. They would in effect rule out new nuclear altogether. Having examined the evidence, I am increasingly convinced that we should reject new nuclear for economic and environmental reasons. There are better, cheaper and faster ways to achieve a zero-carbon power sector by 2030 than going down the nuclear route. Moreover, many experts are concerned that Government support for new nuclear power would mean significantly less investment in renewables and energy efficiency. To do the right thing for our economy, for constituents struggling with fuel bills, and for the environment, amendment 23 would rule out payments for new nuclear through CFD mechanisms. Amendment 25 would rule out any public underwriting of construction costs or other public support for new nuclear through investment contracts.

I will be brief because other hon. Members wish to speak. Amendment 29 would rule out handouts for new fossil fuel plants under the capacity mechanism, which means that capacity payments would go to non-fossil fuel ways of ensuring that power supply met demand. The big six energy suppliers are pressing the Government to support gas-fired power, and urging Ministers to go faster on their capacity market plan to encourage investment in new gas-fired power stations, but a dash for gas, as envisaged by the gas strategy, would be completely incompatible with the nation’s legally binding carbon emissions targets. According to the Committee on Climate Change, that should be plan Z. Perpetuating our reliance on expensive and imported gas means perpetuating high fuel bills. Nor is that the golden solution to energy security that lobbyists would like us to believe it is. Alternative solutions, including the construction and use of interconnector routes, electricity storage, and temporarily shifting or reducing demand during peak periods, should be considered instead. Such solutions should be prioritised.

Finally, anyone who is willing to do the maths on climate change should look at how much more carbon can be safely emitted into the atmosphere and compare it with how much carbon is stored in fossil fuel reserves. For the UK to fulfil its repeated commitment to keep climate change below 2°, around 80% of known fossil fuel reserves must stay in the ground. In the context of that unburnable carbon, using the capacity mechanism to encourage a new dash for gas is both dangerous and irresponsible.

Mark Reckless
I am pleased to follow the hon. Member for Brighton, Pavilion (Caroline Lucas) and to hear that she intends to press amendment 24, a relatively moderate amendment, to a Division. She envisages subsidy for nuclear as long as it is not greater than the subsidy for renewables, but I would prefer a world in which we do not subsidise any energy production. Under this dog’s breakfast of a Bill, we will end up subsidising almost everything.

My worry with nuclear—my hon. Friend the Member for Cheltenham (Martin Horwood) addressed this—is the length of the contract. I do not go all the way with him on the £1 billion a year cost, or the very large sum grossed up over the period of the contract, but my calculations suggest something in the range of £600 million to £700 million a year just for the new Hinkley stations. That is a huge amount of money. Earlier, the Minister seemed unable to get to grips with the idea that the House might express a view on that. The contract is enormous and could put hundreds of pounds on consumers’ bills, and cost billions of pounds over the length of the contract. It would therefore be highly appropriate for the House to consider the matter, and for hon. Members to vote by positive resolution on whether we believe it is the right thing to do with our constituents’ money.

The key problem with the Bill is that it changes the law and puts very large subsidies to different technologies, which Ministers pick as winners in an opaque process, on a contractual basis that cannot realistically later be unpicked. The Chancellor has told us of an increase in the limit from about £2.4 billion to £9.8 billion per year, which is a quadrupling of the amount spent. That will be added to consumers’ bills for those various technologies, but the Bill implements that into contracts that cannot be unpicked. The nuclear contract could be absolutely enormous. I would like far greater concern for our constituents and the bills they pay for electricity.

We used to have the most competitive energy market in the world. I thought that the Minister believed in free markets, yet essentially what we are doing here is almost the final stage of replacing the freest energy market in the world with one that is rigged against consumers. The cost will be far more than the £9.8 billion figure, which ignores the fact that it is not just through the European Union and its directive that we are planning to close existing coal-fired plant, which are the cheapest at producing electricity. Unilaterally, we are banning the construction of new coal-fired power stations, when Germany has several new coal-fired plants under construction.

John Robertson
Will the hon. Gentleman clarify something for me? Is he saying that we should not worry or think about our obligations on climate change? If he is not saying that, how does he expect his electorate to pay for what he is suggesting?

Mark Reckless
I am sorry to hear the hon. Gentleman not focusing on his constituents’ heritage. Climate reduction and the carbon issue should relate to cost. The coal price has collapsed globally largely because of the success of shale gas in the US and its export of coal, and that means that the cost of the proposals is now far larger than it was. Global temperatures rose until 1998 or 2000. Since then, projections of an exponential increase  in temperature have not been borne out by recent data. We have cut our emissions by 24% since 1990, which I think is larger than any other country. What we are left with is a complete mess of policy in the Bill, with various subsidies interacting and greatly increasing bills for our consumers, and I am not sure what the effect will be on reducing carbon emissions compared with, say, the US, which has had a big decrease.

We should look at the cost of coal and the extent to which carbon may be reduced by different things. In this country, we have a price of £16 per tonne on carbon. Under the EU emissions trading scheme, it is less than £2. We are making a great unilateral cross that we must bear when other countries in Europe, for example Germany, are constructing more unabated coal. We will have to buy electricity through the interconnectors, which will hurt our balance of payments and increase the cost to our constituents while we shut down our cheap coal plants. At the same time, shale gas has not come on stream due to the moratorium, as well as ownership and other regulatory restrictions. We will end up with some of the most expensive energy in the world and it is not clear what the impact will be on reducing carbon output.

At the same time as we are closing existing power plants because of the EU, we are banning unilaterally the construction of new plants. The cost of how much we are putting up electricity prices for our constituents should be added to the £9.8 billion figure. We would be much better off if we had a proper market in electricity production, rather than a market rigged against consumers. The Minister, through clauses 38 to 40, wants to introduce a huge network of conflicting subsidies that will let the Government, ex-post, change the conditions of someone’s electricity supply contract. All that will do is increase the price of investment to guard against that risk—yet another thing moving us away from the free market in electricity that might drive down prices for consumers who, certainly in my constituency, are finding the costs very difficult to bear. The previous Government’s policies were bad enough, but the Bill will lead to long-term contracts that may be impossible to get out off, and which will force consumers to pay higher prices for energy for years into the future.

Barry Gardiner
I rise to speak to amendments 148 and 150 in my name, and to amendment 179 in the names of my right hon. and hon. Friends.

Under the large combustion plant directive, 8 GW of old coal has to close by 2015. Of that, 6 GW has already gone, with the remaining 2 GW being considered for conversion to biomass. That leaves 20 GW of old coal set to stay on the system. Of that, approximately 15 GW is being considered for all options, which means that it could be opted into the integrated emissions directive, investing in air filters for NOx and SOx in order to comply. This plant would then not have to close in 2023, and would naturally seek to maximise its return on that capital cost by continuing to provide base load generation capacity unconstrained by the EPS.

Amendment 148 would ensure that where substantial pollution abatement equipment properly dealing with the oxides of sulphur, nitrogen, heavy metals or particles is fitted to the generating station in such a way that  makes it compliant with the EU IED while still emitting above 450 grams per kWh, the plant would then be brought under the EPS framework. Without the amendment, many plants will succeed in circumventing the EPS, which would undermine the EMR, the UK’s carbon budgets, the incentive to invest in CCS and the coalition agreement, which committed the Department of Energy and Climate Change to introducing an EPS as a backstop to unabated coal. Remember, these old coal plants have already recouped their capital costs. Allowing them to avoid the EPS cannot therefore be justified, and I dispute what the Minister said about the importance of not accepting the amendment in order to allow new coal to recoup its costs.

Ian Lavery (Wansbeck) (Lab)
Does my hon. Friend agree that coal has a huge role to play in the energy mix of this country? It must, however, be on the basis of burning coal cleanly, using carbon capture and storage. The Government must get a move on and provide the finances to ensure that that happens as soon as possible.

Barry Gardiner
I am in 100% agreement with my hon. Friend. I am happy to put on the record that coal is the energy of the future for the next 40 years; not necessarily in this country, but around the world. Unless we develop CCS and export it to such countries as China and India, which are going to be using coal, the future will be bleak for all of us. It is imperative to incentivise CCS, which is why amendment 179, in conjunction with amendments 148 and 150, is so important.

The central purpose of the grandfathering provision in the EPS is to enable investors in newly consented plant to recover their costs prior to being forced to fit CCS and/or limit their running hours. The grandfathering date in the Bill as it stands is simply not credible. The EPS currently allows unabated gas to operate as base load until 2045. This is not plausible in a carbon-constrained world in which international commitments to reduce carbon are more likely to increase than otherwise. More to the point, grandfathering to 2045 reduces the policy levers available to government, and is likely to reduce the demand for CCS for coal and seriously undermine the credibility of CCS for gas. The EPS is the backstop; it is a very different policy lever from the decarbonisation target. As such, it should retain flexibility to account for policy failure. I have not sought, therefore, to amend the level of the EPS, because in a situation of extreme policy failure, we might need to continue to use some of the unabated gas into the late 2020s. The inclusion of a 2030 decarbonisation target should reduce that risk significantly, but it would remain a risk, and one for which the EPS would have to account.

Amendment 150 proposes a 15-year window up to 2029 providing an adequate commercial time frame and aligning itself with the 2030 power sector decarbonisation trajectory. It would provide increased investor confidence by being more credible than the current 2045, and by setting a shorter grandfathering period, new gas plant would be incentivised to begin operation sooner, assisting efforts to address energy security concerns in this decade.

Amendment 179 would remedy the problem of the Energy Bill’s requiring CCS projects to operate under the EPS regime from day one. The amendment would apply the EPS to CCS projects only once an agreed and clearly defined commissioning and proving window had passed. That approach would remove an unnecessary  regulatory burden for project developers and lower the cost for consumers, as the EPS risk would not need to be factored into the CFD strike price, and would achieve the Government’s aim—

19:00:00

Debate interrupted (Programme Order, this day).

The Deputy Speaker put forthwith the Question already proposed from the Chair (Standing Order No. 83E), That the clause be read a Second time.

Question agreed to.

New clause 8 accordingly read a Second time, and added to the Bill.

The Deputy Speaker then put forthwith the Questions necessary for the disposal of business to be concluded at that time (Standing Order No. 83E).

New Clause 9

Capacity market rules: procedure

‘(1) Before the first exercise by the Secretary of State of the power to make capacity market rules, the Secretary of State must lay a draft of the rules before Parliament.

(2) If, within the 40-day period, either House of Parliament resolves not to approve the draft, the Secretary of State may not take any further steps in relation to the proposed rules.

(3) If no such resolution is made within that period, the Secretary of State may make the rules in the form of the draft.

(4) Subsection (3) does not prevent a new draft of proposed capacity market rules being laid before Parliament.

(5) In this section “40-day period”, in relation to a draft of proposed capacity market rules, means the period of 40 days beginning with the day on which the draft is laid before Parliament (or, if it is not laid before each House of Parliament on the same day, the later of the 2 days on which it is laid).

(6) For the purposes of calculating the 40-day period, no account is to be taken of any period during which Parliament is dissolved or prorogued or during which both Houses are adjourned for more than 4 days.

(7) Before any exercise by the Secretary of State of a power to make capacity market rules, the Secretary of State must consult—

(a) the Authority;

(b) any person who is a holder of a licence to supply electricity under section 6(1)(d) of EA 1989;

(c) any person who is a capacity provider;

(d) such other persons as the Secretary of State considers it appropriate to consult.

(8) In relation to any exercise by the Secretary of State or the Authority of a power to make capacity market rules, the person making the rules must, as soon as reasonably practicable after they are made, lay them before Parliament and publish them.’.—(Michael Fallon.)

Brought up, and added to the Bill.

New Clause 10

Capacity market rules: further provision

‘(1) Capacity market rules may—

(a) include incidental, supplementary and consequential provision;

(b) make transitory or transitional provision or savings;

(c) make different provision for different cases or circumstances or for different purposes;

(d) make provision subject to exceptions.

(2) A power to make capacity market rules includes a power to amend, add to or remove capacity market rules (and a person exercising such a power may amend, add to or remove provision in capacity market rules made by another person).

(3) But subsection (2) is subject to provision made by electricity capacity regulations.’.—(Michael Fallon.)

Brought up, and added to the Bill.

New Clause 13

Nuclear regulations: civil liability

‘(1) Nuclear regulations may provide for breach of a relevant nuclear duty to be actionable (whether or not they also provide for it to be an offence).

(2) Except so far as nuclear regulations provide, any such breach does not give rise to a claim for breach of statutory duty.

(3) Nuclear regulations may provide for—

(a) defences in relation to any action for breach of a relevant nuclear duty;

(b) any term of an agreement which purports to exclude or restrict liability for breach of a relevant nuclear duty to be void.

(4) For this purpose “relevant nuclear duty” means a duty imposed by—

(a) nuclear regulations, or

(b) any provision of, or made under, the Nuclear Installations Act 1965 that is a relevant statutory provision.

(5) Nothing in this section affects any right of action or defence which otherwise exists or may be available.’.—(Michael Fallon.)

Brought up, and added to the Bill.

New Clause 14

Civil liability: saving for section 12 of the Nuclear Installations Act 1965

‘Nothing in this Part affects the operation of section 12 of the Nuclear Installations Act 1965 (right to compensation by virtue of certain provisions of that Act).’.—(Michael Fallon.)

Brought up, and added to the Bill.

New Clause 5

Expert panel

‘Schedule [The Expert Panel] has effect.’.—(Martin Horwood.)

Brought up.

Question put, That the clause be added to the Bill:—

Division 12
03/06/2013 19:01:00
The House divided:
Ayes: 232
Noes: 287
Question accordingly negatived.

Clause 5

General considerations relating to this Part

Amendment made: 52, page 5, line 10, at end insert—

‘(4) The Secretary of State must before 31st December in each year, beginning with 2014, prepare and lay before Parliament a report setting out how the Secretary of State has carried out during the year the functions under this Part of this Act.

(5) The Secretary of State must publish the report and send a copy of it to the Department of Enterprise, Trade and Investment, the Scottish Ministers and the Welsh Ministers.’.—(Michael Fallon.)

Clause 7

Designation of a CFD counterparty

Amendments made: 53, page 6, line 15, at beginning insert

‘The Secretary of State may exercise the power to designate so that’.

Amendment 54, page 6, line 15, leave out ‘may have’ and insert ‘has’.

Amendment 55, page 6, line 15, at end insert

‘, but only if the Secretary of State considers it necessary for the purpose of ensuring that—

(a) liabilities under a CFD are met,

(b) arrangements entered into for purposes connected to a CFD continue to operate, or

(c) directions given to a CFD counterparty continue to have effect.’.

Amendment 56, page 6, line 20, leave out ‘28 days’’ and insert ‘3 months’’.

Amendment 57, page 6, line 29, leave out ‘obligations’ and insert ‘liabilities’.—(Michael Fallon.)

Clause 8

Duties of a CFD counterparty

Amendment made: 58, page 6, line 39, at end insert—

‘(1A) A CFD counterparty must exercise the functions conferred by or by virtue of this Chapter to ensure that it can meet its liabilities under any CFD to which it is a party.’.—(Michael Fallon.)

Clause 9

Supplier obligation

Amendments made: 59, page 7, line 13, at end insert—

‘(2A) In subsection (2)(a) “costs” means costs in connection with the performance of any function conferred by or by virtue of this Chapter.’.

Amendment 60, page 7, line 39, at end insert—

‘(7A) A CFD counterparty may recover from an electricity supplier, as a civil debt due to it, any sum which—

(a) the electricity supplier is required by virtue of regulations to pay to the CFD counterparty, and

(b) has not been paid by the date on which it is required by virtue of regulations to be paid.’.—(Michael Fallon.)

Clause 11

Payments to electricity suppliers

Amendment made: 61, page 8, line 31, at end insert—

‘(1A) Provision made by virtue of this section may—

(a) include provision for a CFD counterparty to calculate or determine, in accordance with such criteria as may be provided for by or under the regulations, amounts which are owed by the CFD counterparty;

(b) provide for anything which is to be calculated or determined under the regulations to be calculated or determined by such persons, in accordance with such procedure and by reference to such matters and to the opinion of such persons, as may be specified in the regulations.’.—(Michael Fallon.)

Amendment proposed: 24, page 8, line 37, at end insert—

‘(3) Payments offered under a contract for difference relating to the supply of electricity generated by nuclear power must not exceed payments offered under any contract for the supply of electricity from renewable sources.

(4) For the purposes of subsection (3)—

(a) the calculation of payments must include both the strike price and the duration of the contract;

(b) renewable sources are defined in accordance with Article 2 of Directive 2009/28/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 23 April 2009 on the promotion of the use of energy from renewable sources.’.—(Caroline Lucas.)

Question put, That the amendment be made.

Division 13
03/06/2013 19:17:00
The House divided:
Ayes: 20
Noes: 503
Question accordingly negatived.

Clause 12

Appplication of sums held by a CFD counterparty

Amendments made: 62, page 9, line 2, leave out ‘obligations’ and insert ‘its liabilities’.

Amendment 63, page 9, line 4, leave out ‘obligations’ and insert ‘its liabilities’.

Amendment 64, page 9, line 4, at end insert—

‘(2A) In making provision by virtue of subsection (1) the Secretary of State must have regard to the principle that sums should be apportioned in proportion to the amounts which are owed.’.—(Michael Fallon.)

Clause 15

Regulations: further provision

Amendment made: 65, page 10, line 21, at end insert—

‘(3) Regulations must include such provision as the Secretary  of State considers necessary to ensure that a CFD counterparty can meet its liabilities under any CFD to which it is a party.’. —(Michael Fallon.)

Clause 22

Capacity agreements

Amendments made: 101, page 13, line 19, leave out ‘to or’.

Amendment 102, page 13, line 21, leave out ‘to or’.

Amendment 103, in clause 22, page 14, line 6, at end insert—

‘(5A) Provision made by virtue of subsection (4)(f) and (g) may—

(a) include provision for a settlement body to calculate or determine, in accordance with such criteria as may be provided for by or under the regulations, amounts which are owed as capacity payments or capacity incentives;

(b) provide for anything which is to be calculated or determined under the regulations to be calculated or determined by such persons, in accordance with such procedure and by reference to such matters and to the opinion of such persons, as may be specified in the regulations.’.—(Michael Fallon.)

Clause 24

Settlement body

Amendment made: 104, page 15, line 2, at end insert—

‘(1A) In subsection (1)(a) “costs” means costs in connection with the performance of any function conferred by or by virtue of this Chapter.’.—(Michael Fallon.)

Clause 28

Enforcement and dispute resolution

Amendments made: 105, page 16, line 19, at end insert

‘or by capacity market rules.

‘(1A) Capacity market rules may make provision about the enforcement of any obligation or requirement imposed by the rules.’.

Amendment 106, page 16, line 20, after ‘regulations’ insert

‘or in capacity market rules’.

Amendment 107, page 16, line 25, after ‘regulations’ insert

‘or under capacity market rules’.—(Michael Fallon.)

Clause 42

Duty not to exceed annual carbon dioxide emissions limit

Amendment proposed: 179, page 42, line 35, at end insert—

‘( ) Section 42(1) is not to apply in relation to CCS plant until completion of the commissioning and proving period that shall last no longer than 3 years.’.—(Tom Greatrex.)

Question put, That the amendment be made.

Division 14
03/06/2013 19:34:00
The House divided:
Ayes: 225
Noes: 298
Question accordingly negatived.

Clause 50

Review of certain provisions of Part 2

Amendment made: 66, page 50, line 23, at end insert—

‘( ) Chapter 8 (emissions performance standard).’.—(Michael Fallon.)

Clause 59

Nuclear regulations: offences

Amendments made: 108, page 56, line 33, after ‘with’ insert

‘, in England and Wales, a fine or, in Scotland or Northern Ireland,’.

Amendment 109, page 57, line 4, after ‘with’ insert ‘—

(i) in England and Wales, a fine (or a fine not exceeding an amount specified, which must not exceed level 4 on the standard scale), or

(ii) in Scotland or Northern Ireland,’.—(Michael Fallon.)

Clause 60

Civil liability for breach of nuclear regulations

Amendment made: 110, in page 57, line 16, leave out Clause 60.—(Michael Fallon.)

Clause 68

Inquiries

Amendment made: 111, page 61, line 29, leave out ‘a fine not exceeding’ and insert ‘—

(a) in England and Wales, a fine (or a fine not exceeding an amount specified, which must not exceed level 4 on the standard scale), or

(b) in Scotland or Northern Ireland, a fine not exceeding the amount specified, which must not exceed’.—(Michael Fallon.)

Clause 80

Power to obtain information

Amendment made: 112, page 67, line 40, after ‘to’ insert ‘—

(i) in England and Wales, a fine, or

(ii) in Scotland or Northern Ireland,’.—(Michael Fallon.)

Clause 82

HMRC power to seize articles etc to facilitate ONR and inspectors

Amendment made: 113, page 68, line 27, after ‘to’ insert ‘—

(i) in England and Wales, a fine, or

(ii) in Scotland or Northern Ireland,’.—(Michael Fallon.)

Clause 85

General duty of employees at work in relation to requirements imposed on others

Amendment made: 114, page 70, line 15, leave out

‘not exceeding the statutory maximum’

and insert

‘(in England and Wales) or a fine not exceeding the statutory maximum (in Scotland or Northern Ireland)’.—(Michael Fallon.)

Clause 86

Duty not to interfere with or misuse certain things provided under statutory requirements

Amendment made: 115, page 71, line 4, leave out ‘not exceeding £20,000’ and insert

‘(in England and Wales) or a fine not exceeding £20,000 (in Scotland or Northern Ireland)’.—(Michael Fallon.)

Clause 87

Duty not to charge employees for certain things

Amendment made: 116, page 71, line 20, after ‘to’ insert ‘—

(i) in England and Wales, a fine, or

(ii) in Scotland or Northern Ireland’.—(Michael Fallon.)

Clause 88

Offences relating to false information and deception

Amendment made: 117, page 72, line 17, leave out ‘not exceeding £20,000,’ and insert

‘(in England and Wales) or a fine not exceeding £20,000 (in Scotland or Northern Ireland),’.—(Michael Fallon.)

Clause 98

Minor and consequential amendments

Amendment made: 118, page 78, line 29, at end insert—

‘(3) The power in subsection (2) includes power to make modifications of—

(a) paragraphs 16 to 25B of Schedule 12 (amendments of the Nuclear Installations Act 1965), or

(b) the provisions of the Nuclear Installations Act 1965 that are amended by those paragraphs.

(4) The power conferred by virtue of subsection (3) is exercisable—

(a) before or after the date on which those paragraphs come into force, and

(b) only for the purpose of making provision corresponding to any amendments of the Nuclear Installations Act 1965 set out in an order made before that date (whether before or after this Act is passed) under section 76 of the Energy Act 2004 (amendments for giving effect to international obligations).’.—(Michael Fallon.)

Clause 120

Consequential provision

Amendment made: 67, page 91, line 14, at end insert—

‘(4) In the 1986 Act—

(a) in section 4AA(7), for “sections 4AB and 4A” substitute “section 4A”;

(b) in section 7B(4), in paragraph (a) omit “, 4AB”;

(c) in section 23D(2)—

(i) at the end of paragraph (b) omit “and”,

(ii) in paragraph (c) for “sections 4AB and” substitute “section”, and

(iii) at the end of paragraph (c) insert “; and

(d) in the performance of its duties under section114(1) and (2) of the Energy Act 2013.”;

(d) in section 28(5), in paragraph (a) omit “, 4AB”;

(e) in section 38(1A), omit “, 4AB”;

(f) in section 41E(6)—

(i) omit paragraph (b), and

(ii) at the end of paragraph (c) insert “; and

(d) any statement for the time being designated as the strategy and policy statement for the purposes of Part 5 of the Energy Act 2013.”

(5) In EA 1989—

(a) in section 3A(7), for “sections 3B and 3C” substitute “section 3C”;

(b) in section 11E(2)—

(i) at the end of paragraph (b) omit “and”,

(ii) in paragraph (c) for “sections 3B and 3C” substitute “section 3C”, and

(iii) at the end of paragraph (c) insert “; and

(d) in the performance of its duties under section114(1) and (2) of the Energy Act 2013.”;

(c) in section 28(2A), omit “, 3B”;

(d) in section 56C(6)—

(i) omit paragraph (b), and

(ii) at the end of paragraph (c) insert “; and

(d) any statement for the time being designated as the strategy and policy statement for the purposes of Part 5 of the Energy Act 2013.”’.—(Michael Fallon.)

Clause 121

Power to modify energy supply licences: domestic supply contracts

Amendments made: 119, page 91, line 30, leave out from beginning to end of line 35 and insert—

‘by making provision of any of the kinds specified in subsection (3).

(3) The kinds of provision mentioned in subsection (1) are—’

Amendment 120, page 91, line 36, after ‘(a)’ insert ‘provision’.

Amendment 121, page 91, line 38, leave out

‘for specifying a limit on’

and insert ‘provision for restricting’.

Amendment 122, page 92, line 1, leave out ‘about discretionary terms (and’ and insert

‘provision about discretionary terms (which’.

Amendment 123, page 92, line 4, after ‘(d)’ insert ‘provision’.

Amendment 124, page 92, line 5, leave out ‘including’ and insert ‘which may include’.

Amendment 125, page 92, line 11, leave out paragraph (e) and insert—

‘(e) provision for requiring a licence holder to change the domestic tariff on which it supplies gas or electricity to a domestic customer who is on a closed tariff by—

(i) switching to a different domestic tariff for the time being offered by the licence holder, unless the customer objects, or

(ii) offering the customer, or inviting the customer to switch to, a different domestic tariff for the time being offered by the licence holder.’.

Amendment 126, page 92, line 17, at end insert—

‘( ) Any limit imposed by virtue of subsection (3)(b) on the number of tariffs, or tariffs of any category, that a licence holder may adopt must be greater than the number of standard domestic tariffs, or (as the case may be) standard domestic tariffs of that category, that the licence holder is required to adopt.’.

Amendment 127, page 92, line 38, at end insert—

‘( ) may make provision for determining when a licence holder is, or is not, to be regarded as offering to supply gas or electricity on a particular tariff (or as offering other terms in connection with domestic supply contracts) for the purpose of a relevant provision;

( ) may make provision for supplies (or proposed supplies) of gas or electricity to be regarded as being on the same tariff or different tariffs for the purpose of a relevant provision;’.

Amendment 128, page 93, line 17, at end insert—

‘“closed tariff” means a domestic tariff on which a licence holder—

(a) supplies gas or electricity to customers under existing domestic supply contracts, but

(b) no longer offers to supply gas or electricity to customers who are not already on the tariff;’.

Amendment 129, page 93, line 25, leave out from ‘tariff”’ to end of line 26 and insert

‘means the set of principal terms of a domestic supply contract (or proposed domestic supply contract);’.

Amendment 130, page 93, line 41, leave out from ‘period’ to end of line 42 and insert

‘to be determined by the licence holder, but

(b) may not include any term setting the amount of a charge or rate or otherwise specifying how it is to be determined.’.

Amendment 131, page 93, line 45, leave out ‘and’ and insert—

‘( ) a domestic customer is on a particular domestic tariff if gas or electricity is supplied to the customer on that tariff, and’.

Amendment 132, page 93, line 47, at end insert

‘(and references to adopting a tariff include references to doing either or both of them).’.

Amendment 133, page 94, line 1, leave out from second ‘of’ to end of line 3 and insert

‘domestic supply contracts which are the principal terms of such contracts.’.—(Michael Fallon.)

Clause 133

Financial provisions

Amendments made: 68, page 102, line 25, after ‘3’ insert ‘of Part 2’.

Amendment 134, page 102, line 26, leave out ‘a person who is’. —(Michael Fallon.)

Clause 134

Extent

Amendment made: 136, page 103, line 19, leave out from ‘(a)’ to ‘to’ in line 20 and insert

‘paragraph 22 (amendment of section 24A of the Nuclear Installations Act 1965 as it has effect in England and Wales and Scotland) extends’.—(Michael Fallon.)

Clause 135

Commencement

Amendment made: 69, page 103, line 41, leave out ‘120(1) (repeals)’ and insert ‘120(1), (4) and (5)’.—(Michael Fallon.)

Schedule 2

Investment Contracts

Amendments made: 71, page 107, line 25, leave out from ‘paragraph 3)’ to the end of line 29.

Amendment 72, page 108, line 15, leave out from ‘paragraph 3)’ to the end of line 19.—(Michael Fallon.)

Amendment proposed: 9, page 108, line 24, at end insert—

‘( ) For the purposes of paragraphs 1 and 2, information is “confidential information” only if it constitutes a trade secret.’. —(Tom Greatrex.)

Question put, That the amendment be made.

Division 15
03/06/2013 19:47:00
The House divided:
Ayes: 227
Noes: 304
Question accordingly negatived.

Amendments made: 73, page 109, line 24, leave out ‘may be designated’ and insert ‘is eligible’.

Amendment 74, page 109, line 29, at beginning insert

‘The Secretary of State may exercise the power to designate so that’.

Amendment 75, page 109, line 29, leave out ‘may have’ and insert ‘has’.

Amendment 76, page 109, line 29, at end insert

‘, but only if the Secretary of State considers it necessary for the purpose of ensuring that—

(a) liabilities under an investment contract are met,

(b) arrangements entered into for purposes connected to an investment contract continue to operate, or

(c) directions given to an investment contract counterparty continue to have effect.’.

Amendment 77, page 109, line 34, leave out ‘28 days’’ and insert ‘3 months’’.

Amendment 78, page 109, line 37, leave out ‘obligations’ and insert ‘liabilities’.

Amendment 79, page 110, line 38, at end insert—

‘(3A) In sub-paragraph (3)(a) “costs” means costs in connection with the performance of any function conferred by or by virtue of this Schedule.’.

Amendment 80, page 111, line 27, at end insert—

‘(9) The Secretary of State, an investment contract counterparty or a CFD counterparty may recover from an electricity supplier, as a civil debt due, any sum which—

(a) the electricity supplier is required by virtue of regulations to pay to the Secretary of State, the investment contract counterparty or the CFD counterparty (as the case may be), and

(b) has not been paid by the date on which it is required by virtue of regulations to be paid.’.

Amendment 81, page 111, line 31, at end insert—

‘(2) Provision made by virtue of this paragraph may—

(a) include provision for the person by whom sums are owed to calculate or determine, in accordance with such criteria as may be provided for by or under the regulations, amounts which are owed;

(b) provide for anything which is to be calculated or determined under the regulations to be calculated or determined by such persons, in accordance with such procedure and by reference to such matters and to the opinion of such persons, as may be specified in the regulations.’.

Amendment 82, page 111, line 43, leave out ‘obligations’ and insert ‘liabilities’.

Amendment 83, page 112, line 2, leave out ‘obligations’ and insert ‘liabilities’.

Amendment 84, page 112, line 3, at end insert—

‘(2A) In making provision by virtue of sub-paragraph (1) the Secretary of State must have regard to the principle that sums should be apportioned in proportion to the amounts which are owed.’.

Amendment 85, page 114, line 11, at end insert—

‘(1A) An investment contract counterparty and a CFD counterparty must exercise the functions conferred by or by virtue of this Schedule to ensure that it can meet its liabilities under any investment contract to which it is a party.’.

Amendment 86, page 114, line 30, at end insert—

‘(4) Regulations must include such provision as the Secretary of State considers necessary to ensure that an investment contract counterparty or a CFD counterparty can meet its liabilities under any investment contract to which it is a party.’.

Amendment 87, page 115, line 5, after ‘property,’ insert ‘or designated’.

Amendment 88, page 115, line 16, leave out

‘, to any extent considered appropriate by the Secretary of State,’.

Amendment 89, page 115, line 17, after ‘treated’ insert ‘to any extent’.

Amendment 90, page 115, line 18, at end insert—

‘(2A) Sub-paragraph (2B) applies from the beginning of the first day on which all of the following three conditions are met, namely—

(a) a definition of an “eligible generator” is in force by virtue of section 10(3) or the date is 1st January 2016 or later;

(b) a designation under section 7(1) has effect;

(c) provision required by section 9(1) to be made is in force.

(2B) The Secretary of State must in respect of each investment contract, within such period of time as the Secretary of State considers reasonable—

(a) make a transfer scheme by virtue of sub-paragraph (1)(a) or (c) to ensure the transfer of all rights and liabilities under the investment contract, and

(b) make provision under sub-paragraph (2) for the investment contract to be treated as a CFD for the purposes of all provision made by or by virtue of Chapter 2 of Part 2 of this Act.

(2C) But sub-paragraph (2B) does not apply to the extent that the Secretary of State considers it appropriate in all the circumstances of the case to disapply it.’.—(Michael Fallon.)

Schedule 8

Inspectors

Amendments made: 137, page 139, line 5, leave out ‘not exceeding £20,000,’ and insert

‘(in England and Wales) or a fine not exceeding £20,000 (in Scotland or Northern Ireland),’.

Amendment 138, page 143, line 34, leave out ‘not exceeding £20,000,’ and insert

‘(in England and Wales) or a fine not exceeding £20,000 (in Scotland or Northern Ireland),’.

Amendment 139, page 144, line 5, after ‘to’ insert

‘—in England and Wales, a fine, or in Scotland or Northern Ireland’.

(i) in England and Wales, a fine, or

(ii) in Scotland or Northern Ireland’.

Amendment 140, page 144, line 13, after ‘to’ insert ‘—

(a) in England and Wales, a fine, or

(b) in Scotland or Northern Ireland,’.—(Michael Fallon.)

Schedule 9

Disclosure of information

Amendments made: 141, page 147, line 29, leave out

‘not exceeding the statutory maximum’

and insert

‘(in England and Wales) or a fine not exceeding the statutory maximum (in Scotland or Northern Ireland)’.

Amendment 91, page 149, line 9, at end insert—

( ) the Natural Resources Body for Wales;’.—(Michael Fallon.)

Schedule 10

Provisions relating to offences

Amendment made: 142, page 157, line 42, leave out ‘not exceeding £20,000,’ and insert

‘(in England and Wales) or a fine not exceeding £20,000 (in Scotland or Northern Ireland),’.—(Michael Fallon.)

Schedule 12

Minor and consequential amendments relating to Part 3

Amendments made: 143, page 168, line 17, leave out from beginning to end of line 12 on page 171 and insert—

16 For section 1 substitute—

“1 Restriction of certain nuclear installations to licensed sites

(1) No person may use a site for the purpose of installing or operating—

(a) any nuclear reactor (other than a nuclear reactor comprised in a means of transport, whether by land, water or air), or

(b) any other installation of a prescribed kind,

unless a licence to do so has been granted in respect of the site by the appropriate national authority and is in force.

(2) Such a licence is referred to in this Act as a “nuclear site licence”.

(3) The only kinds of installation that may be prescribed under subsection (1)(b) are installations (other than nuclear reactors) designed or adapted for—

(a) producing or using atomic energy,

(b) any process which—

(i) is preparatory or ancillary to producing or using atomic energy, and

(ii) involves, or is capable of causing, the emission of ionising radiations, or

(c) storing, processing or disposing of—

(i) nuclear fuel, or

(ii) bulk quantities of other radioactive matter which has been produced or irradiated in the course of the production or use of nuclear fuel.

(4) Regulations under subsection (1)(b) may make provision for exempting an installation from subsection (1).

(5) Regulations made by virtue of subsection (4)—

(a) may provide for any exemption to be conditional;

(b) may not result in an installation being exempt from subsection (1) unless the Secretary of State is satisfied that it is not a relevant installation (or, in the case of a conditional exemption, would not be a relevant installation if the prescribed conditions were satisfied).

(6) Before exercising any function under subsection (1)(b), (4) or (5) in or as regards Scotland, the Secretary of State must consult the Scottish Ministers.

(7) Any person who contravenes subsection (1) is guilty of an offence.

(8) A person convicted of an offence under subsection (7) in England and Wales or Scotland is liable—

(a) on conviction on indictment to imprisonment for a term not exceeding 2 years, or a fine, or both;

(b) on summary conviction to imprisonment for a term not exceeding 12 months, or a fine (in England and Wales) or a fine not exceeding £20,000 (in Scotland), or both.

(9) A person convicted of an offence under subsection (7) in Northern Ireland is liable—

(a) on conviction on indictment to imprisonment for a term not exceeding 5 years, or a fine, or both;

(b) on summary conviction to imprisonment for a term not exceeding 3 months, or a fine not exceeding the prescribed sum, or both.

(10) In relation to an offence committed before the commencement of section 154(1) of the Criminal Justice Act 2003 (general limit on magistrates’ court’s power to imprison), the reference to 12 months in subsection (8)(b), as it has effect in England and Wales, is to be read as a reference to 6 months.

(11) Subsection (1) is subject to section 47 of the Energy Act 2008 (prohibition in England and Wales and Northern Ireland on use of site in absence of approved funded decommissioning programme).”

17 For section 3 substitute—

“3 Grant and variation of nuclear site licences

(1) A nuclear site licence—

(a) may be granted only to a body corporate;

(b) is not transferable.

(2) The appropriate national authority must consult the appropriate environment authority before granting a nuclear site licence.

(3) Two or more installations in the vicinity of one another may, if the appropriate national authority consider appropriate, be treated for the purposes of the grant of a nuclear site licence as being on the same site.

(4) Subject to subsection (8), where an application is made for a nuclear site licence, the appropriate national authority may direct the applicant to serve a notice on any public authority specified in the direction.

(5) For this purpose “public authority” includes—

(a) in relation to a site in England or Wales, a water undertaker;

(b) in relation to a site in Scotland, Scottish Water;

(c) in relation to a site in Northern Ireland, a water undertaker (within the meaning of the Water and Sewerage Services) (Northern Ireland) Order 2006 (S.I. 2006/3336 (N.I. 21)).

(6) Such a notice must—

(a) state that the application has been made,

(b) give such particulars about the proposed use of the site under the licence as may be specified in the direction, and

(c) state that the body on whom it is served may make representations about the application to the appropriate national authority within three months of the date of service.

(7) Where a direction has been given under subsection (4), the appropriate national authority may not grant the licence unless it is satisfied that—

(a) three months have passed since the service of the last of the notices required by the direction, and

(b) the authority has considered any representations made in accordance with any of those notices.

(8) Subsection (4) does not apply in relation to an application in respect of a site for a generating station where—

(a) a consent under section 36 of the Electricity Act 1989 is required for the operation of the station (or would be required but for an order under the Planning Act 2008 granting development consent for the site), or

(b) a consent under Article 39 of the Electricity (Northern Ireland) Order 1992 is required for the operation of the station.

(9) A nuclear site licence may include provision about when section 19(1) is to start to apply in relation to the licensed site.

(10) But, if the licence relates to a site in England, Wales or Scotland, such a provision may be included only with the consent of the Secretary of State.

(11) Where a nuclear site licence includes such a provision, section 19(1) does not apply in relation to the site until—

(a) the time determined in accordance with the provision, or

(b) if earlier, the time when the site is first used for the operation of a nuclear installation after the grant of the licence.

(12) The appropriate national authority may from time to time vary a nuclear site licence by excluding from it any part of the licensed site—

(a) which the licensee no longer needs for any use requiring such a licence, and

(b) with respect to which the appropriate national authority is satisfied that there is no danger from ionising radiations from anything on that part of the site.

(13) The appropriate national authority must consult the appropriate environment authority before varying a nuclear site licence if the variation relates to or affects the creation, accumulation or disposal of radioactive waste.

(14) In subsection (13), “radioactive waste”—

(a) in relation to a site in England or Wales, has the same meaning as in the Environmental Permitting (England and Wales) Regulations 2010 (S.I. 2010/675);

(b) in relation to a site in Scotland or Northern Ireland, has the same meaning as in the Radioactive Substances Act 1993.”

18 For section 4 substitute—

“4 Attachment of conditions to licences

(1) The appropriate national authority—

(a) must, when it grants a nuclear site licence, attach to it such conditions as the authority considers necessary or desirable in the interests of safety, and

(b) may attach such conditions to it at any other time.

(2) For the purposes of subsection (1), “safety” in relation to a nuclear site includes—

(a) safety in normal circumstances, and

(b) safety in the event of any accident or other emergency on the site.

(3) Conditions that may be attached to a licence by virtue of subsection (1) may in particular include provision—

(a) for securing that an efficient system is maintained for detecting and recording the presence and intensity of any ionising radiations from time to time emitted from anything on the site or from anything discharged on or from the site;

(b) with respect to the design, siting, construction, installation, operation, modification and maintenance of any plant or other installation on, or to be installed on, the site;

(c) with respect to preparations for dealing with, and measures to be taken on the happening of, any accident or other emergency on the site;

(d) without prejudice to sections 13 and 16 of the Radioactive Substances Act 1993 or to the Environmental Permitting (England and Wales) Regulations 2010 (S.I. 2010/675), with respect to the discharge of any substance on or from the site.

(4) The appropriate national authority may at any time attach to a nuclear site licence such conditions as the appropriate national authority may consider appropriate with respect to the handling, treatment and disposal of nuclear matter.

(5) The appropriate national authority may at any time vary or revoke any condition for the time being attached to a nuclear site licence by virtue of this section.

(6) The appropriate national authority must consult the appropriate environment authority before—

(a) attaching any condition to a nuclear site licence, or

(b) varying or revoking any condition attached to a nuclear site licence,

if the condition relates to or affects the creation, accumulation or disposal of radioactive waste.

(7) In subsection (6) “radioactive waste”—

(a) in relation to a site in England or Wales, has the same meaning as in the Environmental Permitting (England and Wales) Regulations 2010 (S.I. 2010/675);

(b) in relation to a site in Scotland or Northern Ireland, has the same meaning as in the Radioactive Substances Act 1993.

(8) Any power under this section to attach, vary or revoke a condition is exercisable in writing.

(9) The appropriate national authority must consider any representation which is—

(a) made to it by an organisation representing persons who have duties on a site in respect of which a nuclear site licence is in force, and

(b) relates to the exercise by the authority of any of its powers under this section in relation to the site.

(10) Where a condition attached to a nuclear site licence by virtue of this section is contravened, each of the following is guilty of an offence—

(a) the licensee, and

(b) any person having duties upon the site in question who committed the contravention.

(11) A person convicted of an offence under subsection (10) in England and Wales or Scotland is liable—

(a) on conviction on indictment to imprisonment for a term not exceeding 2 years, or a fine, or both;

(b) on summary conviction to imprisonment for a term not exceeding 12 months, or a fine (in England and Wales) or a fine not exceeding £20,000 (in Scotland), or both.

(12) A person convicted of an offence under subsection (10) in Northern Ireland is liable—

(a) on conviction on indictment to imprisonment for a term not exceeding 5 years, or a fine, or both;

(b) on summary conviction to imprisonment for a term not exceeding 3 months, or a fine not exceeding the prescribed sum, or both.

(13) In relation to an offence committed before the commencement of section 154(1) of the Criminal Justice Act 2003 (general limit on magistrates’ court’s power to imprison) the reference to 12 months in subsection (11)(b), as it has effect in England and Wales, is to be read as a reference to 6 months.”

19 For section 5 substitute—

“5 Revocation and surrender of licences

(1) A nuclear site licence may at any time be—

(a) revoked by the appropriate national authority, or

(b) surrendered by the licensee.

(2) The appropriate national authority must consult the appropriate environment authority before revoking a nuclear site licence.

(3) Subsections (4) to (6) apply where a nuclear site licence has been revoked or surrendered.

(4) If the appropriate national authority requires it to do so, the licensee must deliver up or account for the licence to such person as the appropriate national authority may direct.

(5) During the remainder of the period of the licensee’s responsibility the appropriate national authority may give the licensee such directions as the authority may consider appropriate for preventing, or giving warning of, any risk of—

(a) injury to any person, or

(b) damage to any property,

by ionising radiations from anything remaining on the site.

(6) A nuclear safety inspector may direct the licensee to ensure that, during the remainder of the period of responsibility, notices indicating the limits of the site are kept posted on the site in the positions specified in the direction.

(7) For this purpose, “nuclear safety inspector” means an inspector appointed—

(a) by the ONR under Schedule 8 to the Energy Act 2013, in the case of a site in England, Wales or Scotland, or

(b) under section 24, in the case of a site in Northern Ireland.

(8) A licensee who contravenes any direction for the time being in force under subsection (5) or (6) is guilty of an offence.

(9) A person who without reasonable cause pulls down, injures or defaces any notice posted under subsection (6) is guilty of an offence.

(10) A person convicted of an offence under subsection (8) in England and Wales or Scotland is liable—

(a) on conviction on indictment to imprisonment for a term not exceeding 2 years, or a fine, or both;

(b) on summary conviction to imprisonment for a term not exceeding 12 months, or a fine (in England and Wales) or a fine not exceeding £20,000 (in Scotland), or both.

(11) A person convicted of an offence under subsection (8) in Northern Ireland is liable—

(a) on conviction on indictment, to imprisonment for a term not exceeding 12 months, or a fine, or both;

(b) on summary conviction, to imprisonment for a term not exceeding 3 months, or a fine not exceeding the prescribed sum, or both.

(12) A person convicted of an offence under subsection (9) is liable on summary conviction—

(a) in England and Wales or Scotland, to a fine not exceeding level 2 on the standard scale;

(b) in Northern Ireland, to a fine not exceeding level 1 on the standard scale.

(13) In relation to an offence committed before the commencement of section 154(1) of the Criminal Justice Act 2003 (general limit on magistrates’ court’s power to imprison), the reference to 12 months in subsection (10)(b), as it has effect in England and Wales, is to be read as a reference to 6 months.

(14) In this Act, “period of responsibility” in relation to the licensee under a nuclear site licence means, as respects the site in question or any part of it, the period—

(a) beginning with the grant of the licence, and

(b) ending with whichever of the dates in subsection (15) is the earliest,

except that it does not include any period during which section 19(1) does not apply in relation to the site.

(15) Those dates are—

(a) the date when the appropriate national authority gives notice in writing to the licensee that in the authority’s opinion there has ceased to be any danger from ionising radiations from anything on the site or, as the case may be, on the part of it in question;

(b) the date when a new nuclear site licence in respect of a site comprising the site in question or, as the case may be, that part of it, is granted (whether to the same licensee or to some other person);

(c) the date when the following conditions have both become satisfied—

(i) the site in question or, as the case may be, that part of it is used or occupied by or on behalf of the Crown, and

(ii) a nuclear site licence has ceased to be required in respect of that site or part.”

20 For section 6 substitute—

“6 Maintenance of list of licensed sites

(1) The appropriate authority must maintain a list showing every site in respect of which a nuclear site licence has been granted.

(2) The list—

(a) need not show any site or part of a site in the case of which—

(i) no nuclear site licence is for the time being in force; and

(ii) 30 years have passed since the end of the last licensee’s period of responsibility;

(b) must include a map or maps showing the position and limits of each site shown in the list.

(3) The authority must arrange for the list, or a copy of it, to be available for inspection by the public.

(4) In this section “appropriate authority” means—

(a) in relation to England and Wales and Northern Ireland, the Secretary of State;

(b) in relation to Scotland, the Scottish Ministers.”

20A In section 19(1) (special cover for licensee’s liability), for “section 3(5)” substitute “section 3(11)”.

20B For section 22 (reporting of and inquiries into dangerous occurrences) substitute—

“22 Reporting of and inquiries into dangerous occurrences

(1) The provisions of this section apply where any prescribed occurrence happens—

(a) on a licensed site, or

(b) in the course of the carriage of nuclear matter on behalf of any person where a duty with respect to that carriage is imposed on that person by section 7, 10 or 11 of this Act.

(2) The licensee or other person mentioned in subsection (1) must ensure that the occurrence is reported without delay in the prescribed manner—

(a) to the appropriate national authority, and

(b) to such other persons, if any, as may be prescribed in relation to occurrences of that kind.

(3) A person who is required by virtue of subsection (2) to report an occurrence and who fails to do so is guilty of an offence.

(4) A person convicted of an offence under subsection (3) in England and Wales or Scotland is liable—

(a) on conviction on indictment to imprisonment for a term not exceeding 2 years, or a fine, or both;

(b) on summary conviction to imprisonment for a term not exceeding 12 months, or a fine (in England and Wales) or a fine not exceeding £20,000 (in Scotland), or both.

(5) A person convicted of an offence under subsection (3) in Northern Ireland is liable on summary conviction to imprisonment for a term not exceeding 3 months, or a fine not exceeding level 3 on the standard scale, or both.

(6) In relation to an offence committed before the commencement of section 154(1) of the Criminal Justice Act 2003 (general limit on magistrates’ court’s power to imprison), the reference to 12 months in subsection (4)(b), as it has effect in England and Wales, is to be read as a reference to 6 months.

(7) Before exercising any function under subsection (1) or (2) in or as regards Scotland, the Secretary of State must consult the Scottish Ministers.

(8) Subsections (9) to (11) have effect only in relation to a prescribed occurrence which happens in Northern Ireland.

(9) The Secretary of State—

(a) may direct an inspector to make a special report with respect to the occurrence, and

(b) may cause any such report, or so much of it as it is not in the Secretary of State’s opinion inconsistent with the interests of national security to disclose, to be made public at such time and in such manner as the Secretary of State considers appropriate.

(10) The Secretary of State may direct an inquiry to be held into the occurrence and its causes, circumstances and effects.

(11) Any such inquiry must be held—

(a) in accordance with the provisions of Schedule 2 to this Act, and

(b) in public, except where or to the extent that it appears to the Secretary of State expedient in the interests of national security to direct otherwise.”.’.

Amendment 92, page 171, line 35, leave out ‘or Wales’.

Amendment 93, page 171, line 40, at end insert—

(a) in the case of a site in Wales, the Natural Resources Body for Wales;’.

Amendment 144, page 172, line 1, leave out sub-paragraph (3) and insert—

‘( ) Omit the definition of “inspector”.

( ) In the definition of “nuclear site licence” for “section 1(1)” substitute “section 1(2)”.’.

Amendment 145, page 172, leave out line 10 and insert—

‘( ) In the definition of “period of responsibility” for “section 5(3)” substitute “section 5(14)”.

24 In section 27 (Northern Ireland) omit paragraphs (b) and (c) of subsection (1).’.

Amendment 146, page 172, line 13, at end insert—

25A (1) Schedule 2 is amended as follows.

(1) In paragraph 1 for “section 22(5)” substitute “section 22(10)”.

(2) In paragraphs 1, 2, 5 and 6, for “the Minister” in each place where it appears substitute “the Secretary of State”.

(3) In paragraph 7—

(a) for “or, in Scotland, the Court of Session, and the High Court or Court of Session” substitute “and the High Court”;

(b) omit “or, as the case may be, the Court of Session”.

(4) Omit paragraph 8.

(5) For the title substitute “Inquiries under section 22(10) relating to occurrences in Northern Ireland”.

Consequential repeals and revocations

25B In consequence of the amendments made by paragraphs 16 to 25A, the provisions listed in the following Table are repealed or revoked to the extent specified—

------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
|Title                                                                                                   |Extent of repeal or revocation                                                                                                             |
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
|Electricity Act 1989 (c. 29)                                                                            |In Schedule 16, paragraph 11.                                                                                                              |
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
|Water Act 1989 (c. 15)                                                                                  |In Schedule 25, paragraph 33.                                                                                                              |
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
|Radioactive Substances Act 1993 (c. 12)                                                                 |In Schedule 4, paragraph 2.                                                                                                                |
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
|Environment Act 1995 (c. 25)                                                                            |In Schedule 22, paragraphs 7 to 9.                                                                                                         |
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
|Energy Act 2004 (c. 20)                                                                                 |Section 78(1).                                                                                                                             |
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
|Energy Act 2008 (c. 32)                                                                                 |Section 65.                                                                                                                                |
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
|                                                                                                        |In section 112(3), the words “(other than section 65)”.                                                                                    |
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
|Marine and Coastal Access Act 2009 (c. 23)                                                              |In Schedule 14, paragraph 6.                                                                                                               |
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
|The Nuclear Installations Act 1965 etc. (Repeals and Modifications) Regulations 1974 (S.I. 1974/2056)   |Schedule 1, except for the entry relating to section 25 of the Nuclear Installations Act 1965.                                             |
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
|                                                                                                        |In Schedule 2, paragraphs 1, 2, 3 and 6.                                                                                                   |
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
|The Nuclear Installations Act 1965 (Repeal and Modifications) Regulations 1990 (S.I. 1990/1918)         |In the Schedule, paragraph 1.                                                                                                              |
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
|The Scotland Act 1998 (Transfer of Functions to the Scottish Ministers etc.) Order 1999 (S.I. 1999/1750)|In Schedule 1, in the entry for the Nuclear Installations Act 1965, in column 1, in paragraph (b), the words “6 and”.                      |
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
|                                                                                                        |In Schedule 3, in the entry for the Nuclear Installations Act 1965, in column 1, the words—(a) “1(1)(b) and (2)”; (b) “and 22(1) and (2),”.|
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
|The Water Industry (Scotland) Act 2002 (Consequential Modifications) Order 2004 (S.I. 2004/1822 (S. 3)) |In the Schedule, paragraph 5.                                                                                                              |
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
|The Environmental Permitting (England and Wales) Regulations 2010 (S.I. 2010/675)                       |In Part 1 of Schedule 26, paragraph 2.                                                                                                     |
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
|The Natural Resources Body for Wales (Functions) Order 2013 (S.I. 2013/755 (W. 90))                     |In Part 1 of Schedule 2, paragraph 41.’.                                                                                                   |
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Amendment 147, page 172, line 22, leave out ‘not exceeding £20,000,’ and insert

‘(in England and Wales) or a fine not exceeding £20,000 (in Scotland or Northern Ireland),’.—(Michael Fallon.)

Schedule 14

Consumer redress orders

Luciana Berger (Liverpool, Wavertree) (Lab/Co-op)
I beg to move amendment 2, page 192, line 9, leave out subsection (4).

Madam Deputy Speaker (Dawn Primarolo)
With this it will be convenient to discuss the following:

Amendment 3, page 192, line 18, at end insert

‘unless one or more consumers have suffered loss or damage greater than this value.’.

Amendment 4, page 192, line 24, at end insert

‘unless one or more consumers have suffered loss or damage greater than this value.’.

Amendment 5, page 198, line 31, leave out subsection (4).

Amendment 6, page 198, line 40, at end insert

‘unless one or more consumers have suffered loss or damage greater than this value.’.

Amendment 7, page 198, line 46, at end insert

‘unless one or more consumers have suffered loss or damage greater than this value.’.

Luciana Berger
Forgive me for the delay in getting to my feet, Madam Deputy Speaker. I was expecting the Minister to go first—I am so used to coming after him.

Amendments 2, 3 and 4 to part 1 of schedule 14 relate to gas customers. Amendments 5, 6 and 7 to part 2 cover electricity consumers. We are proposing these changes for a simple reason: we need to do everything we can to protect consumers who lose out when energy suppliers break the rules. I sincerely hope that Members on both sides of the House agree about that. My right hon. Friend the shadow Energy Secretary called for a system to guarantee compensation to customers who have been ripped off as far back as October 2011, which is a year and a half ago now, so it is nice to see that the Government are finally following our advice and doing something to give redress to consumers.

20:00:00

We therefore welcome the fact that the Bill gives Ofgem powers to compel energy companies to award compensation. At present the regulator can only try to negotiate voluntary agreements with suppliers. We have  seen in the past that they do not always deliver the best deal for people who have lost out through no fault of their own. It is good that this wrong is being corrected. However, these new powers do not go far enough.

There are two important aspects of the Bill that need to be addressed. First, it places an arbitrary cap on the amount of compensation that can be paid to customers who have been treated unfairly. Secondly, it contains a crucial loophole.

Mr Weir
On the arbitrary cap, I agree with what the hon. Lady has been saying, but it seems to me that the amendment would mean that a company faced unlimited liability for any consumer redress order that affected more than a single consumer, which could have serious implications, for instance for investment in any infrastructure that might be required. Will she address that point?

Luciana Berger
I am expecting to hear from the Government about that, and I intend to address the point later. After I have done so, I will be happy to respond to any further questions the hon. Gentleman might have.

As I was saying, the Bill also contains a crucial loophole. The new powers would not apply to current Ofgem investigations. That is why we raised concerns in Committee, and it is why we have brought back amendments addressing the point on Report. Before I address the specific issues, let me remind the Minister why this will matter a great deal to households across the country.

Over the last few years there have been far too many cases of people being mistreated or misled by their energy providers. In April last year EDF agreed to pay £4.5 million after an investigation found it had been mis-selling to customers, and in April this year SSE was given a record fine of £10.5 million for running a sales process where people were given information that simply was not true. There are other ongoing investigations into practices at E.ON, npower and ScottishPower, and overall Ofgem is currently carrying out 15 formal investigations into potential malpractice by energy suppliers. Its enforcement team is also informally reviewing an additional 12 cases.

That is why we agree that schedule 14 represents a step in the right direction. It gives the regulator the power to order companies to compensate customers who have been misled about their energy deal and tariffs and the arrangements by which they are put on those tariffs.

None of those ongoing investigations will be covered by the new powers now being introduced, however. That means that any company found guilty of wrongdoing in any inquiry that begins or concludes today, tomorrow, next week, next month or at any time before this Bill receives Royal Assent will escape the new penalties all together. Also, if in future the regulator finds that there have been other failings by suppliers that took place before the Bill became law, those companies will avoid sanction as well.

I wonder how the Minister can think that that is right. How will it be fair to consumers who have suffered bad practice by their suppliers that they are not to receive due compensation? Amendments 2 and 5 would close this loophole and make all energy firms that break  the rules fully accountable both to their customers and the regulator. I hope the Minister will agree that that is the right thing to do and support these changes.

John Robertson
Does my hon. Friend agree that we have also not used the current rules properly? The fines that have been imposed of late do not even go back to the people who pay the bills. Does she agree that we should be looking to compensate the people who pay the bills, rather than give that money to the Treasury?

Luciana Berger
My hon. Friend raises an important point. Currently, the fines that are being raised are going into the Treasury, and many questions have been asked about where that money should go.

If the Minister does not support our amendments, will he tell us what indication he has had from Ofgem as to how many of its current 15 formal investigations will conclude before these new powers are introduced, and how many consumers could miss out on compensation as a result?

Following the discussions we had in Committee, I suspect the Minister might argue that we are proposing retrospective legislation. Let me be very clear about why that is not the case. These amendments do not alter any of the regulations energy companies currently need to abide by. That is the crucial point. We are not seeking to penalise companies for something that was not against the rules at the time. Our proposals would simply ensure that customers whose providers are found to have broken the rules receive appropriate compensation, including for investigations that fall before the Bill receives Royal Assent. I hope the Minister will bear that in mind and support this change.

Turning to our other amendments, we seek to enshrine an important point of principle in the new powers: that customers who have been treated unfairly can, and always should be, fully compensated. As it is currently drafted, schedule 14 places a limit on compensation to 10% of an energy company’s annual turnover. I ask the Minister to explain what would happen if the losses suffered by customers were greater than that. How was that arbitrary figure reached—and why not 11% or 15%?

John Robertson
Can my hon. Friend clarify what she means by turnover, as factors such as the central pot and whether generation is included as well make a big difference?

Luciana Berger
My hon. Friend raises a point we on the Opposition Benches have raised many times before about the challenges we face with our very opaque energy market, where we do not know the true cost of our energy and many of our generators are also our suppliers. We will wait for the secondary legislation to hear exactly what the Government mean by that term, but it is fair to say that we are dealing a lot in this Bill with a broken market, and it is a shame that the Government are not proposing legislation to fix it.

We accept that there is a relatively small chance of a compensation package exceeding 10%, but that is not an impossibility. If a case ever did exceed that amount, it is likely that an enormous number of consumers would have been affected. It would be irresponsible for the Government not to be prepared for that scenario. In  Committee, the Minister said that if consumers suffer losses greater than the compensation they receive, they will still be able to seek further redress through the courts, but surely he acknowledges it would be better not to risk that happening in the first place by amending this Bill.

Surely that would be better than abandoning consumers and leaving them to endure a long and protracted court battle to get due recompense. We believe it makes more sense to guarantee that families will always receive pound-for-pound compensation when they have been mistreated, which is why our amendments specify that compensation would be allowed to exceed 10% of turnover if

“one or more consumers have suffered loss or damage greater than this value.”

The Department’s own impact assessment said that such a change would send a powerful signal to energy firms on consumer protection. That is our priority.

This Government claim that they are on the side of consumers and today they have the chance to prove it. Our amendments put consumers first, ensuring that mistreated families will not be short-changed, no matter when they were wronged or how much they are owed. Will the Government stand up for the many? The question for the Minister and his colleagues is simple today: whose side are they on?

The Minister of State, Department of Energy and Climate Change (Gregory Barker)
The Opposition amendments seek to amend schedule 14 by removing restrictions on retrospective and unlimited liability. I understand the concerns and motivations of the Opposition, but I can assure them that this coalition is also committed not only to helping hard-working families and, indeed, all consumers with the rising cost of living, but to empowering consumers and protecting hard-working families from rip-offs and scams. So although I have some sympathy with the aim of amendments 2 and 5, which are intended to allow Ofgem to compel energy companies to pay redress for events that happened prior to the enactment of this Bill, I am troubled by the effect of setting a precedent by retrospectively applying powers in the energy market and by the impact that that would have on all consumers. There is a general principle that powers should not be applied by this House retrospectively. Beyond that principle, there is potential for very real, negative impacts on consumers.

The Government are committed to encouraging competitive pressure on the big energy market players, but the regulatory uncertainty these amendments would introduce would be likely to lead to an increase in the cost of capital for energy companies, and that, in turn, could push up bills for everyone. Furthermore, it could create investor uncertainty at the very time we are trying to encourage the necessary private sector investment required to move to a low-carbon economy and renew our energy infrastructure. More expensive finance would most heavily hit the smaller companies that are also covered by this legislation—the very small companies and entrepreneurs we want to attract into the sector. Under the previous Labour Government, competition in the electricity sector shrank to leave just six big supply companies dominating it. The last thing we want to do is accept amendments that could hinder new entrants to the market.

The amendments may also lead to increases in the cost of insurance premiums for companies, in order to cover the extension of liability for events that took place prior to the enactment of this legislation—again, that is likely to be proportionately higher for smaller energy companies. All these factors could push up the cost of living for hard-working families, at a time when, as we know, many can ill afford it. I understand the intention behind the amendments, but the unintended consequences could end up hitting the very people we are trying to protect, and so we cannot accept them.

Again, I have some sympathy with the intention of Opposition amendments 3, 4, 6 and 7, which seek to ensure that the amount of compensation that can be required through a consumer redress order is not limited. As I said at the outset, the coalition Government are absolutely committed to providing a fair deal to consumers. So when considering these amendments, we should look to balance the need for a redress mechanism that allows consumers timely and proportionate compensation, with an appeal mechanism that is proportionate to the potential liability faced by energy companies.

Under existing arrangements, consumers can obtain redress through the courts, but we recognise that the legal process is lengthier and does not offer a typically quick remedy for consumers who have been badly served or ripped off. That is largely because the courts offer recourse for consumers in cases where compensation may exceed the 10% limit set in this legislation. The legal process is necessarily equal to the potential sums at stake. The powers set out in schedule 14, however, contain appeal mechanisms, proportionate to the potential penalty, limited to 10% of an energy company’s annual turnover.

20:15:00

John Robertson
I ask the Minister the same question I asked my hon. Friend the Member for Liverpool, Wavertree (Luciana Berger): what is classified as turnover? Does it just include retail or does it also include generation?

Gregory Barker
I will correct myself if I am wrong, but I believe we are talking about global turnover—we are talking about very significant sums. [Interruption.] This relates to the turnover of the company under investigation. [Interruption.] That was very helpful.

John Robertson
Just for clarification, is “the company under investigation” the mother company as well as the subsidiary company, or does it include all the companies that that company is part of?

Gregory Barker
The hon. Gentleman asks a fascinating and timely question, one which deserves a proper answer. He may have misheard me, because when I said “global turnover” what I actually meant was UK turnover. Nevertheless, that is clearly a very significant amount.

Our approach would allow for a relatively straightforward resolution of relatively simple cases. Accepting amendments to remove the cap would require us to make changes to the appeal mechanism, which could deny consumers access to the timely compensation they are due, as it could result in a far lengthier resolution of cases if the stakes are much higher. In considering whether such a trade-off is justifiable, we should take into account just how unlikely it would be for consumers to lose out on  this scale. Exceeding a 10% cap of annual turnover would mean penalties and compensation of over a £1 billion for the very largest domestic energy supplier. The largest penalty imposed to date by Ofgem has been £15 million and under our legislation the cap for the largest would be set at £1 billion. A cap on redress is therefore unlikely to hinder Ofgem’s ability to impose appropriate redress orders.

In addition, there are unintended consequences of removing the 10% cap on penalty and redress, as that could also increase the costs of capital and insurance premiums for energy companies. Again, that would particularly affect the smaller companies—the very ones we are trying to attract into the sector—with all the adverse impacts on consumer bills that I mentioned earlier.

Energy companies should be in no doubt, however, that these powers are designed to ensure that consumers receive appropriate compensation. The combined 10% cap on penalties and redress will apply to each separate regulatory breach. If companies flout the rules on a number of occasions, they will therefore face correspondingly larger payouts. For the reasons I have set out, I hope that hon. Members will, on balance, agree not to press their amendments to a Division.

Mr Weir
I find myself in the unusual position of agreeing with a lot of what those on both Front Benches have said. I have a lot of sympathy with the amendments and, unlike the Minister, I do not find any difficulties with amendments 2 and 5. If a company has been doing over consumers, whether it has been doing it the day before the Act comes into force or the day after does not seem to make any difference. If we are seriously considering making such companies pay such large sums for their misdemeanours, I would be happy to support those two amendments. That would send a clear message that we are fed up with some of the things that have been coming to light in recent years and with how the consumer has been mistreated, taken for granted and, frankly, milked, by some companies.

My hon. Friend the Member for Glasgow North West (John Robertson), if I may call him that, made very good points about turnover.

Gregory Barker
I am grateful to the hon. Gentleman for giving way, particularly as I have only just sat down. Let me be absolutely clear on this important point. For investigations by Ofgem that are already under way, Ofgem will continue to negotiate compensation on behalf of affected consumers. Companies that fail to negotiate and agree satisfactory redress can expect Ofgem to reflect that lack of co-operation in the penalty it sets.

Mr Weir
I accept that, and I understand what the Minister is saying, but he said in his speech that the maximum penalty to date had been £15 million. Under the Bill he is talking about £1 billion. There is a massive difference between the two and my point stands: if consumers have been ripped off, it does not matter whether it happened just before the new system was introduced or just after that. The same should apply, in my view, and I do not have any great problem with that proposal.

However, I have a big problem with amendments 3, 4, 6 and 7. As I said in an intervention on the hon. Member for Liverpool, Wavertree (Luciana Berger), I have a worry—the same sort of worry as the Minister—about the effect that the amendments would have on the company. It seems that one aspect of the Bill is about trying to get investment into the energy industry. For far too long there has been insufficient investment; a lot of modernisation and new investment is needed to get our energy system up to scratch. The figure is 10% of the turnover, whatever that turnover will be—I am still not clear what the word covers. That takes me back to the days when I served on the Select Committee on Energy and Climate Change with my hon. Friend the Member for Glasgow North West and we had the big six in one day and asked them about their profits. We asked whether they had made their profits selling to the consumer and they replied, “Oh no, we didn’t do that.” We asked whether they made them through generation, and heard, “Oh no, we didn’t make it from that.” We asked, “Where did you make those profits? You have large profits,” and no one could answer the question. There is great difficulty in pinning down what is meant by profit and turnover. In a time when we have six big energy companies, five of which are effectively multinational companies—we have seen in recent weeks what happens with the tax of multinational companies—we need a bit more clarity about what is meant by turnover.

Although the sums involved in 10% of turnover are significant, my bigger worry is that a company could be under investigation for an alleged breach for a considerable time. If there is a set limit, whether it is 10%, 20% or whatever, anyone thinking of lending that company money for infrastructure projects—most of them borrow from large financial institutions or other lenders—will know the contingent liability and what they are dealing with. I grant that if the liability is absolutely unlimited the sums involved are unlikely greatly to affect the big companies, given their size, but the uncertainty might well affect them. As we all know, those lending sums of money of such magnitude will consider the state of the company. A potential unlimited liability going into many billions of pounds, if there has been such an incident, could seriously undermine the company’s ability to borrow the money for much-needed infrastructure in our energy supply system.

I have a great deal of sympathy with those four amendments and understand what the hon. Member for Liverpool, Wavertree is trying to do, but I have a difficulty with them. Perhaps when she winds up she could expand on them and reassure me on the points I have made.

We must also remember that the provision would affect not only the big six energy companies but all regulated persons. If I understand correctly, that would include the small companies that are trying to get into the market. The Government say that they want to bring new entrants into the market, including the smaller companies that are beginning to nibble away at the edges of the big companies. If they were faced with such a penalty—let us hope that none of them would be—it would be the death knell for them.

John Robertson
The hon. Gentleman makes a very good argument and I had not thought of going down that road. Does he accept that those small companies  could, through no fault of their own, follow what the large companies are doing and get themselves into bother that they did not really think about when they first started doing whatever it was that they did?

Mr Weir
My hon. Friend makes an excellent point. Whereas the big six would be able to take that financial hit, many of the smaller companies would not be able to do so. These proposals would take us down a road that could have serious repercussions. Many small companies are beginning to break into the market. Many of them are particularly strong in renewables, for example, and that is one way in which much of our renewables investment might be generated in the future.

I ask the shadow Minister to think about my points. I have sympathy with the amendments and understand what they want to do. We all want to ensure that any energy company that has been mistreating consumers is dealt with severely. There are two sides to this, however, so let us not rush into doing something that could have profound and unforeseen results.

John Robertson
It is a pleasure to follow the hon. Member for Angus (Mr Weir). He was an excellent member of the Energy and Climate Change Committee when it was first put together and I am very sorry that he is not still a part of it—but there is time for him yet, as they say.

I agree with a lot of what the Minister said—I do not pick holes in things just for the sake of it—but it is not my place to worry about whether the big six have financial difficulties or whatever else. Personally, I could not give one jot about any of those companies. They are big enough to look after themselves and they certainly know the rules, because they know how to break them and get away with it.

I support every one of the amendments tabled by my colleagues on the Front Bench. I have no problems with them whatsoever. The only thing I have to say to the Minister is that I was slightly disappointed by his speech. He talked about hard-working families and, yes, I believe that hard-working families should always be looked at and looked after as best we can. My constituency has more than its fair share of elderly people and it has the highest percentage of single women in any constituency in the country, which probably means that most of them will be elderly. That means that they might have some difficulties that other people do not have. There are also quite a number of people who are disabled. We have found over the years that those are the people who do not complain, because they are frightened to, and who do not get the help they probably should get. Once again, we are getting to a stage when people think that their biggest bill is their electricity bill, their gas bill or both. According to some newspaper articles, people will be more worried about how they pay their fuel bills than how they pay their mortgage.

I do not worry about the big six, because they are making plenty of money, but we have to nail down what we mean by profit and turnover. Let us take EDF, a large multinational company that is to build a new nuclear power station, from which it will make a lot of money. It also has other power stations in the United Kingdom on which it makes money, and of course it is involved in retail as well, where it says it makes 2% profit. It makes some 17% to 19% profit from generation.  It puts that 19% alongside the 2% when it comes to giving shareholders a dividend, but it tells Government that it is making only 2% profit. The company may therefore put up its prices—SSE did so only last October—yet these same companies are making enormous profits. They are telling people, “Invest in our company because you can get a return for your money.” That is not right.

20:30:00

That brings me to the point that I really want to make about being in default. The Bill is the end or start of a process. The Minister said that 19 cases are going on. Some of them will continue beyond the introduction of the Bill. Will they be judged under the old system, or will there be a “get out of jail free” card as the new Bill takes over? Will there be two different kinds of penalties running side by side?

Gregory Barker
I absolutely assure the hon. Gentleman that there will be no “get out of jail free” card.

John Robertson
That is a very good answer, but the Minister gave an answer earlier that was found to be wrong, so I will wait for a note to come over to him.

Barry Gardiner
I have listened carefully to the debate. Is there not in my hon. Friend’s mind, as there is in mine, a concern that we are putting on companies a financial penalty that will ultimately be borne by consumers? Should we not instead address the real problem, which is directors’ liability? It was noticeable in the recent SSE case that no criminal prosecution for fraud was brought, even though the maximum penalty was imposed. Would it not be better to impose a strict liability on the directors of the companies, so that it is not the consumer who ends up paying the fines?

John Robertson
My hon. Friend makes a very good point, which brings me to the next issue that I wanted to raise: what happens to the money? If we get £1 billion off a company—not that that is likely, because it would be a lot more than we get at present—or even £100 million, surely that company should have to pay that back to its consumers. It should not give it to the Treasury to spend, though I am sure it would spend it in a very nice manner. It should go towards what it was designed for: paying for electricity. That £100 million or £1 billion should go back to the customers of that company. I ask the Minister to look at that.

The Bill is a great deal better than it was when we scrutinised it on the Select Committee. Everything else about the Bill has been rushed. Look at the number of amendments tabled today, and the number of things that we are not being told—the strike price and so on. We are basically being given a promise that it will be all right on the night. We need to know what the Bill is. The Select Committee had five weeks’ scrutiny of the Bill, when normally the period is 12 weeks. Then we waited an inordinate amount of time for the Bill to come back to us. When we got it, we sent it back to the Minister and told him that it was a dog’s breakfast; it was terrible. We then got something else. It has been through Committee, and we have improved it. I implore the Minister to consider the amendments that hon. Members on both sides of the House are putting forward, and seriously look at using the best bits to improve the Bill  further, because this is an okay Bill, but that is all it is; it is not good. It is probably slightly better than what we had at the start, but we still have a long way to go. I ask the Minister to consider that.

I also ask the Minister to look at the issue of people paying their taxes. We see that npower has admitted that it does not pay corporation tax. Another three of the major companies say that they do not pay much corporation tax. I am pleased to say that the two companies with Scottish links say that they do pay their corporation tax, although I would still like to look at the books.

There lies the biggest problem that we have with energy: looking at the books. What are the books? I have talked to Ofgem and to the Minister. What do the books cover? That goes back to the definition of cost and the definition of turnover. Where does the generation element come in and where does the retail element end? What happens to all the money that is made on either side of the box in the middle? That is a real problem. When billions of pounds of profit are made on one side and appear not to be counted, and billions of pounds are missing on the other side so the companies put the prices up, they keep making money but the consumers—the poor, the elderly, the disabled, the hard-working families that the Minister likes to talk about—are all suffering, and it appears that our Government do not care.

We should be doing more. We have even got to the stage where HMRC hired a gentleman called Volker Beckers, who was the chief executive of RWE npower. I bet he knows how to deal with tax for those energy companies. I hope he uses the same skill as he used for RWE not to pay corporation tax to get the same money out of the same company for HMRC.

There is much that is good in the Bill. I hope the Minister will consider the amendments moved by my hon. Friend the Member for Liverpool, Wavertree (Luciana Berger) and listen to what my friend the hon. Member for Angus said. Between us all, we will make the Bill better, but we must remember that at the end of the day it is the people who put us here that we should be looking after.

Luciana Berger
I have been listening carefully for almost an hour to the debate, and I listened carefully to what the Minister said. We on the Opposition Benches still intend to divide the House on amendments 2 and 3. Let me explain why.

I reiterate the point that I made about the number of investigations currently under way. Ofgem is carrying out 15 formal investigations into potential malpractice by energy suppliers, and its enforcement team is informally reviewing an additional 12 cases. On that basis we consider it crucial that consumer redress orders be issued in respect of contraventions that might occur before the Bill comes into force. I reiterate that that is not retrospective legislation; it just means that consumers can get the redress they deserve.

Amendment 3 protects an important point of principle. Instead of a cap on the amount of compensation that consumers can receive, customers who have been treated poorly should be entitled to receive what they are rightly due. If the Government are convinced, as I heard the Minister say, that the level of compensation would  never reach 10% of turnover, whatever that definition of turnover might be, the amendments should not present much difficulty. They would take effect only if the harm to consumers was above the 10% threshold. If it is unlikely ever to reach that threshold, the cost of that risk would be relatively small, and if the level of damages were to exceed that level, surely the Government would want to ensure that customers who had been treated unfairly were properly protected.

Question put, That the amendment be made.

Division 16
03/06/2013 20:38:00
The House divided:
Ayes: 217
Noes: 276
Question accordingly negatived.

Amendment proposed: 3, page 192, line 18, at end insert

‘unless one or more consumers have suffered loss or damage greater than this value.’.—(Luciana Berger.)

Question put, That the amendment be made.

Division 17
03/06/2013 20:50:00
The House divided:
Ayes: 213
Noes: 280
Question accordingly negatived.

Bill to be further considered tomorrow.

