Reform of Intelligence and Security Committee

Motion made, and Question proposed,

That this House endorses the proposals for the reform of practice and operation of the Intelligence and Security Committee as set out in paragraphs 235-244 of the Governance of Britain White Paper, Cm 7342-I, including provision for nomination of the members of the Committee drawn from the House of Commons to be based in future on proposals made by this House.—[David Miliband.]

Amendment proposed: (a), at end add:

“; and considers that the secretariat of the Intelligence and Security Committee should be staffed by officials under the authority of the Clerk of the House.”.—[Andrew Mackinlay.]

Question put, That the amendment be made:—

Division 266
17/07/2008 17:28:00
The House divided:
Ayes: 32
Noes: 205
Question accordingly negatived.

Resolved,

That this House endorses the proposals for the reform of practice and operation of the Intelligence and Security Committee as set out in paragraphs 235-244 of the Governance of Britain White Paper, Cm 7342-I, including provision for nomination of the members of the Committee drawn from the House of Commons to be based in future on proposals made by this House.

Madam Deputy Speaker (Sylvia Heal)
Does the hon. Member for Walsall, North (Mr. Winnick) wish to move his amendment?

Mr. Winnick
On the basis of what the Government have said, I shall not move my amendment.

membership of Intelligence and Security committee

Ordered,

That the following new Standing Order be made:

Members of the Intelligence and Security Committee

(1) The Committee of Selection may propose that certain Members be recommended to the Prime Minister for appointment to the Intelligence and Security Committee under section 10 of the Intelligence Services Act 1994.

(2) No motion may be made for the House to agree to a proposal under this order unless—

(a) notice of it has been given at least two sitting days previously; and

(b) it is made on behalf of the Committee of Selection by the chairman or another member of the committee.

(3) Paragraph (1) (c) of Standing Order No. 15 (Exempted business) shall apply to any motion made under this order.—[David Miliband.]

Petition

